The Project Gutenberg EBook of General Science, by Bertha M. Clark 

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included 
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

Title: General Science 

Author: Bertha M. Clark 

Release Date: August 25, 2005 [EBook #16593] 

Language: English 

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1 

PREFACE 

==========
This book is not intended to prepare for college entrance 
examinations; it will not, in fact, prepare for any of the present-day 
stock examinations in physics, chemistry, or hygiene, but it should 
prepare the thoughtful reader to meet wisely and actively some of 
life's important problems, and should enable him to pass muster on the 
principles and theories underlying scientific, and therefore economic, 
management, whether in the shop or in the home. 

We hear a great deal about the conservation of our natural resources, 
such as forests and waterways; it is hoped that this book will show 
the vital importance of the conservation of human strength and health, 
and the irreparable loss to society of energy uselessly dissipated, 
either in idle worry or in aimless activity. Most of us would reproach 
ourselves for lack of shrewdness if we spent for any article more than 
it was worth, yet few of us consider that we daily expend on domestic 
and business tasks an amount of energy far in excess of that actually 
required. The farmer who flails his grain instead of threshing it 
wastes time and energy; the housewife who washes with her hands alone 
and does not aid herself by the use of washing machine and proper 
bleaching agents dissipates energy sadly needed for other duties. 

The Chapter on machines is intended not only as a stimulus to the 
invention of further labor-saving devices, but also as an eye opener 
to those who, in the future struggle for existence, must perforce go 
to the wall unless they understand how to make use of contrivances 
whereby man's limited physical strength is made effective for larger 
tasks. 

==========
The Chapter on musical instruments is more detailed than seems 
warranted at first sight; but interest in orchestral instruments is 
real and general, and there is a persistent desire for intelligent 
information relative to musical instruments. The child of the laborer 
as well as the child of the merchant finds it possible to attend some 
of the weekly orchestral concerts, with their tiers of cheap seats, 
and nothing adds more to the enjoyment and instruction of such hours 
than an intimate acquaintance with the leading instruments. Unless 
this is given in the public schools, a large percentage of mankind is 
deprived of it, and it is for this reason that so large a share of the 
treatment of sound has been devoted to musical instruments. 

The treatment of electricity is more theoretical than that used in 
preceding Chapters, but the subject does not lend itself readily to 
popular presentation; and, moreover, it is assumed that the 
information and training acquired in the previous work will give the 
pupil power to understand the more advanced thought and method. 

The real value of a book depends not so much upon the information 
given as upon the permanent interest stimulated and the initiative 
aroused. The youthful mind, and indeed the average adult mind as 
well, is singularly non-logical and incapable of continued 
concentration, and loses interest under too consecutive thought and 
sustained style. For this reason the author has sacrificed at times 
detail to general effect, logical development to present-day interest 
and facts, and has made use of a popular, light style of writing as 
well as of the more formal and logical style common to books of 
science. 

No claim is made to originality in subject matter. The actual facts, 
theories, and principles used are such as have been presented in 
previous textbooks of science, but the manner and sequence of 
presentation are new and, so far as I know, untried elsewhere. These 
are such as in my experience have aroused the greatest interest and 
initiative, and such as have at the same time given the maximum 
benefit from the informational standpoint. In no case, however, is 
mental training sacrificed to information; but mental development is 
sought through the student's willing and interested participation in 
the actual daily happenings of the home and the shop and the field, 
rather than through formal recitations and laboratory experiments. 

Practical laboratory work in connection with the study of this book is 
==========
provided for in my _Laboratory Manual in General Science_, which 
contains directions for a series of experiments designed to make the 
pupil familiar with the facts and theories discussed in the textbook. 

I have sought and have gained help from many of the standard 
textbooks, new and old. The following firms have kindly placed cuts 
at my disposal, and have thus materially aided in the preparation of 
the illustrations: American Radiator Company; Commercial Museum, 
Philadelphia; General Electric Company; Hershey Chocolate Company; 
_Scientific American_; The Goulds Manufacturing Company; Victor 
Talking Machine Company. Acknowledgment is also due to Professor Alvin 
Davison for figures 19, 23, 29, 142, and 161. 

Mr. W.D. Lewis, Principal of the William Penn High School, has read 
the manuscript and has given me the benefit of his experience and 
interest. Miss. Helen Hill, librarian of the same school, has been of 
invaluable service as regards suggestions and proof reading. Miss. 
Droege, of the Baldwin School, Bryn Mawr, has also been of very great 
service. Practically all of my assistants have given of their time and 
skill to the preparation of the work, but the list is too long for 
individual mention. 

BERTHA M. CLARK. 

CHAPTER I 

HEAT 


I. Value of Fire. Every day, uncontrolled fire wipes out human 
lives and destroys vast amounts of property; every day, fire, 
controlled and regulated in stove and furnace, cooks our food and 
==========
warms our houses. Fire melts ore and allows of the forging of iron, as 
in the blacksmith's shop, and of the fashioning of innumerable objects 
serviceable to man. Heated boilers change water into the steam which 
drives our engines on land and sea. Heat causes rain and wind, fog and 
cloud; heat enables vegetation to grow and thus indirectly provides 
our food. Whether heat comes directly from the sun or from artificial 
sources such as coal, wood, oil, or electricity, it is vitally 
connected with our daily life, and for this reason the facts and 
theories relative to it are among the most important that can be 
studied. Heat, if properly regulated and controlled, would never be 
injurious to man; hence in the following paragraphs heat will be 
considered merely in its helpful capacity. 

2. General Effect of Heat. _Expansion and Contraction_. One of the 
best-known effects of heat is the change which it causes in the size 
of a substance. Every housewife knows that if a kettle is filled with 
cold water to begin with, there will be an overflow as soon as the 
water becomes heated. Heat causes not only water, but all other 
liquids, to occupy more space, or to expand, and in some cases the 
expansion, or increase in size, is surprisingly large. For example, if 
100 pints of ice water is heated in a kettle, the 100 pints will 
steadily expand until, at the boiling point, it will occupy as much 
space as 104 pints of ice water. 

The expansion of water can be easily shown by heating a flask (Fig. I) 
filled with water and closed by a cork through which a narrow tube 
passes. As the water is heated, it expands and forces its way up the 
narrow tube. If the heat is removed, the liquid cools, contracts, and 
slowly falls in the tube, resuming in time its original size or 
volume. A similar observation can be made with alcohol, mercury, or 
any other convenient liquid. 

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--As the water becomes warmer it expands and 
rise in the narrow tube.] 

Not only liquids are affected by heat and cold, but solids also are 
subject to similar changes. A metal ball which when cool will just 
==========
slip through a ring (Fig. 2) will, when heated, be too large to slip 
through the ring. Telegraph and telephone wires which in winter are 
stretched taut from pole to pole, sag in hot weather and are much too 
long. In summer they are exposed to the fierce rays of the sun, become 
strongly heated, and expand sufficiently to sag. If the wires were 
stretched taut in the summer, there would not be sufficient leeway for 
the contraction which accompanies cold weather, and in winter they 
would snap. 

[Illustration: FIG. 2--When the ball is heated, it become too large to 
slip through the ring.] 

Air expands greatly when heated (Fig. 3), but since air is practically 
invisible, we are not ordinarily conscious of any change in it. The 
expansion of air can be readily shown by putting a drop of ink in a 
thin glass tube, inserting the tube in the cork of a flask, and 
applying heat to the flask (Fig. 4). The ink is forced up the tube by 
the expanding air. Even the warmth of the hand is generally sufficient 
to cause the drop to rise steadily in the tube. The rise of the drop 
of ink shows that the air in the flask occupies more space than 
formerly, and since the quantity of air has not changed, each cubic 
inch of space must hold less warm air than| it held of cold air; that 
is, one cubic inch of warm air weighs less than one cubic inch of cold 
air, or warm air is less dense than cold air. All gases, if not 
confined, expand when heated and contract as they cool. Heat, in 
general, causes substances to expand or become less dense. 

[Illustration: FIG. 3--As the air in _A_ is heated, it expands and 
escapes in the form of bubbles.] 

3. Amount of Expansion and Contraction. While most substances expand 
when heated and contract when cooled, they are not all affected 
equally by the same changes in temperature. Alcohol expands more than 
water, and water more than mercury. Steel wire which measures 1/4 mile 
on a snowy day will gain 25 inches in length on a warm summer day, and 
an aluminum wire under the same conditions would gain 50 inches in 
length. 

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--As the air in _A_ is heated, it expands and 
forces the drop of ink up the tube.] 
==========

4. Advantages and Disadvantages of Expansion and Contraction. We owe 
the snug fit of metal tires and bands to the expansion and contraction 
resulting from heating and cooling. The tire of a wagon wheel is made 
slightly smaller than the wheel which it is to protect; it is then 
put into a very hot fire and heated until it has expanded sufficiently 
to slip on the wheel. As the tire cools it contracts and fits the 
wheel closely. 

In a railroad, spaces are usually left between consecutive rails in 
order to allow for expansion during the summer. 

The unsightly cracks and humps in cement floors are sometimes due to 
the expansion resulting from heat (Fig. 5). Cracking from this cause 
can frequently be avoided by cutting the soft cement into squares, the 
spaces between them giving opportunity for expansion just as do the 
spaces between the rails of railroads. 

[Illustration: FIG. 5: A cement walk broken by expansion due to sun 
heat.] 

In the construction of long wire fences provision must be made for 
tightening the wire in summer, otherwise great sagging would occur. 

==========
Heat plays an important part in the splitting of rocks and in the 
formation of d?bris. Rocks in exposed places are greatly affected by 
changes in temperature, and in regions where the changes in 
temperature are sudden, severe, and frequent, the rocks are not able 
to withstand the strain of expansion and contraction, and as a result 
crack and split. In the Sahara Desert much crumbling of the rock into 
sand has been caused by the intense heat of the day followed by the 
sharp frost of night. The heat of the day causes the rocks to expand, 
and the cold of night causes them to contract, and these two forces 
constantly at work loosen the grains of the rock and force them out of 
place, thus producing crumbling. 

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Splitting and crumbling of rock caused by 
alternating heat and cold.] 

The surface of the rock is the most exposed part, and during the day 
the surface, heated by the sun's rays, expands and becomes too large 
for the interior, and crumbling and splitting result from the strain. 
With the sudden fall of temperature in the late afternoon and night, 
the surface of the rock becomes greatly chilled and colder than the 
rock beneath; the surface rock therefore contracts and shrinks more 
than the underlying rock, and again crumbling results (Fig. 6). 

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Debris formed from crumbled rock.] 

On bare mountains, the heating and cooling effects of the sun are very 
striking(Fig. 7); the surface of many a mountain peak is covered with 
cracked rock so insecure that a touch or step will dislodge the 
==========
fragments and start them down the mountain slope. The lower levels of 
mountains are frequently buried several feet under d?bris which has 
been formed in this way from higher peaks, and which has slowly 
accumulated at the lower levels. 

5. Temperature. When an object feels hot to the touch, we say that 
it has a high temperature; when it feels cold to the touch, that it 
has a low temperature; but we are not accurate judges of heat. Ice 
water seems comparatively warm after eating ice cream, and yet we know 
that ice water is by no means warm. A room may seem warm to a person 
who has been walking in the cold air, while it may feel decidedly cold 
to some one who has come from a warmer room. If the hand is cold, 
lukewarm water feels hot, but if the hand has been in very hot water 
and is then transferred to lukewarm water, the latter will seem cold. 
We see that the sensation or feeling of warmth is not an accurate 
guide to the temperature of a substance; and yet until 1592, one 
hundred years after the discovery of America, people relied solely 
upon their sensations for the measurement of temperature. Very hot 
substances cannot be touched without injury, and hence inconvenience 
as well as the necessity for accuracy led to the invention of the 
thermometer, an instrument whose operation depends upon the fact that 
most substances expand when heated and contract when cooled. 

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Making a thermometer.] 

==========
6. The Thermometer. The modern thermometer consists of a glass tube 
at the lower end of which is a bulb filled with mercury or colored 
alcohol (Fig. 8). After the bulb has been filled with the mercury, it 
is placed in a beaker of water and the water is heated by a Bunsen 
burner. As the water becomes warmer and warmer the level of the 
mercury in the tube steadily rises until the water boils, when the 
level remains stationary (Fig. 9). A scratch is made on the tube to 
indicate the point to which the mercury rises when the bulb is placed 
in boiling water, and this point is marked 212?. The tube is then 
removed from the boiling water, and after cooling for a few minutes, 
it is placed in a vessel containing finely chopped ice (Fig. 10). The 
mercury column falls rapidly, but finally remains stationary, and at 
this level another scratch is made on the tube and the point is marked 
32?. The space between these two points, which represent the 
temperatures of boiling water and of melting ice, is divided into 180 
equal parts called degrees. The thermometer in use in the United 
States is marked in this way and is called the Fahrenheit thermometer 
after its designer. Before the degrees are etched on the thermometer 
the open end of the tube is sealed. 

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--Determining one of the fixed points of a 
thermometer.] 

The Centigrade thermometer, in use in foreign countries and in all 
scientific work, is similar to the Fahrenheit except that the fixed 
points are marked 100? and 0?, and the interval between the points is 
divided into 100 equal parts instead of into 180. 

_The boiling point of water is 212? F. or 100? C_. 

_The melting point of ice is 32? F. or 0? C_. 
==========

Glass thermometers of the above type are the ones most generally used, 
but there are many different types for special purposes. 

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--Determining the lower fixed point of a 
thermometer.] 

7. Some Uses of a Thermometer. One of the chief values of a 
thermometer is the service it has rendered to medicine. If a 
thermometer is held for a few minutes under the tongue of a normal, 
healthy person, the mercury will rise to about 98.4? F. If the 
temperature of the body registers several degrees above or below this 
point, a physician should be consulted immediately. The temperature of 
the body is a trustworthy indicator of general physical condition; 
hence in all hospitals the temperature of patients is carefully taken 
at stated intervals. 

Commercially, temperature readings are extremely important. In sugar 
refineries the temperature of the heated liquids is observed most 
carefully, since a difference in temperature, however slight, affects 
not only the general appearance of sugars and sirups, but the quality 
as well. The many varieties of steel likewise show the influence which 
heat may have on the nature of a substance. By observation and tedious 
experimentation it has been found that if hardened steel is heated to 
about 450? F. and quickly cooled, it gives the fine cutting edge of 
razors; if it is heated to about 500? F. and then cooled, the metal is 
much coarser and is suitable for shears and farm implements; while if 
it is heated but 50? F. higher, that is, to 550? F., it gives the fine 
elastic steel of watch springs. 

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--A well-made commercial thermometer.] 

A thermometer could be put to good use in every kitchen; the 
inexperienced housekeeper who cannot judge of the "heat" of the oven 
would be saved bad bread, etc., if the thermometer were a part of her 
equipment. The thermometer can also be used in detecting adulterants. 
Butter should melt at 94? F.; if it does not, you may be sure that it 
is adulterated with suet or other cheap fat. Olive oil should be a 
clear liquid above 75? F.; if, above this temperature, it looks 
cloudy, you may be sure that it too is adulterated with fat. 

==========
8. Methods of Heating Buildings. _Open Fireplaces and Stoves._ 
Before the time of stoves and furnaces, man heated his modest dwelling 
by open fires alone. The burning logs gave warmth to the cabin and 
served as a primitive cooking agent; and the smoke which usually 
accompanies burning bodies was carried away by means of the chimney. 
But in an open fireplace much heat escapes with the smoke and is lost, 
and only a small portion streams into the room and gives warmth. 

When fuel is placed in an open fireplace (Fig. 12) and lighted, the 
air immediately surrounding the fire becomes warmer and, because of 
expansion, becomes lighter than the cold air above. The cold air, 
being heavier, falls and forces the warmer air upward, and along with 
the warm air goes the disagreeable smoke. The fall of the colder and 
heavier air, and the rise of the warmer and hence lighter air, is 
similar to the exchange which takes place when water is poured on oil; 
the water, being heavier than oil, sinks to the bottom and forces the 
oil to the surface. The warmer air which escapes up the chimney 
carries with it the disagreeable smoke, and when all the smoke is got 
rid of in this way, the chimney is said to draw well. 

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--The open fireplace as an early method of 
heating.] 

As the air is heated by the fire it expands, and is pushed up the 
chimney by the cold air which is constantly entering through loose 
windows and doors. Open fireplaces are very healthful because the air 
which is driven out is impure, while the air which rushes in is fresh 
and brings oxygen to the human being. 

But open fireplaces, while pleasant to look at, are not efficient for 
either heating or cooking. The possibilities for the latter are 
especially limited, and the invention of stoves was a great advance in 
efficiency, economy, and comfort. A stove is a receptacle for fire, 
provided with a definite inlet for air and a definite outlet for 
smoke, and able to radiate into the room most of the heat produced 
from the fire which burns within. The inlet, or draft, admits enough 
air to cause the fire to burn brightly or slowly as the case may be. 
If we wish a hot fire, the draft is opened wide and enough air enters 
to produce a strong glow. If we wish a low fire, the inlet is only 
partially opened, and just enough air enters to keep the fuel 
smoldering. 

When the fire is started, the damper should be opened wide in order to 
allow the escape of smoke; but after the fire is well started there is 
less smoke, and the damper may be partly closed. If the damper is kept 
open, coal is rapidly consumed, and the additional heat passes out 
through the chimney, and is lost to use. 

9. Furnaces. _Hot Air_. The labor involved in the care of numerous 
stoves is considerable, and hence the advent of a central heating 
stove, or furnace, was a great saving in strength and fuel. A furnace 
is a stove arranged as in Figure 13. The stove _S_, like all other 
==========
stoves, has an inlet for air and an outlet _C_ for smoke; but in 
addition, it has built around it a chamber in which air circulates and 
is warmed. The air warmed by the stove is forced upward by cold air 
which enters from outside. For example, cold air constantly entering 
at _E_ drives the air heated by _S_ through pipes and ducts to the 
rooms to be heated. 

The metal pipes which convey the heated air from the furnace to the 
ducts are sometimes covered with felt, asbestos, or other 
non-conducting material in order that heat may not be lost during 
transmission. The ducts which receive the heated air from the pipes 
are built in the non-conducting walls of the house, and hence lose 
practically no heat. The air which reaches halls and rooms is 
therefore warm, in spite of its long journey from the cellar. 

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--A furnace. Pipes conduct hot air to the 
rooms.] 

Not only houses are warmed by a central heating stove, but whole 
communities sometimes depend upon a central heating plant. In the 
latter case, pipes closely wrapped with a non-conducting material 
carry steam long distances underground to heat remote buildings. 
Overbrook and Radnor, Pa., are towns in which such a system is used. 

10. Hot-water Heating. The heated air which rises from furnaces is 
seldom hot enough to warm large buildings well; hence furnace heating 
is being largely supplanted by hot-water heating. 

The principle of hot-water heating is shown by the following simple 
experiment. Two flasks and two tubes are arranged as in Figure 15, the 
upper flask containing a colored liquid and the lower flask clear 
water. If heat is applied to _B_, one can see at the end of a few 
seconds the downward circulation of the colored liquid and the upward 
circulation of the clear water. If we represent a boiler by _B_, a 
radiator by the coiled tube, and a safety tank by _C_, we shall have a 
very fair illustration of the principle of a hot-water heating system. 
The hot water in the radiators cools and, in cooling, gives up its 
heat to the rooms and thus warms them. 

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--Hot-water heating.] 

In hot-water heating systems, fresh air is not brought to the rooms, 
for the radiators are closed pipes containing hot water. It is largely 
for this reason that thoughtful people are careful to raise windows at 
intervals. Some systems of hot-water heating secure ventilation by 
confining the radiators to the basement, to which cold air from 
outside is constantly admitted in such a way that it circulates over 
the radiators and becomes strongly heated. This warm fresh air then 
passes through ordinary flues to the rooms above. 

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--The principle of hot-water heating.] 

In Figure 16, a radiator is shown in a boxlike structure in the 
cellar. Fresh air from outside enters a flue at the right, passes the 
radiator, where it is warmed, and then makes its way to the room 
through a flue at the left. The warm air which thus enters the room is 
thoroughly fresh. The actual labor involved in furnace heating and in 
hot-water heating is practically the same, since coal must be fed to 
the fire, and ashes must be removed; but the hot-water system has the 
advantage of economy and cleanliness. 

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Fresh air from outside circulates over the 
radiators and then rises into the rooms to be heated.] 

11. Fresh Air. Fresh air is essential to normal healthy living, and 
2000 cubic feet of air per hour is desirable for each individual. If a 
gentle breeze is blowing, a barely perceptible opening of a window 
will give the needed amount, even if there are no additional drafts of 
fresh air into the room through cracks. Most houses are so loosely 
constructed that fresh air enters imperceptibly in many ways, and 
whether we will or no, we receive some fresh air. The supply is, 
however, never sufficient in itself and should not be depended upon 
alone. At night, or at any other time when gas lights are required, 
the need for ventilation increases, because every gas light in a room 
uses up the same amount of air as four people. 

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--The air which goes to the schoolrooms is 
warmed by passage over the radiators.] 

In the preceding Section, we learned that many houses heated by hot 
water are supplied with fresh-air pipes which admit fresh air into 
separate rooms or into suites of rooms. In some cases the amount which 
enters is so great that the air in a room is changed three or four 
times an hour. The constant inflow of cold air and exit of warm air 
==========
necessitates larger radiators and more hot water and hence more coal 
to heat the larger quantity of water, but the additional expense is 
more than compensated by the gain in health. 

12. Winds and Currents. The gentlest summer breezes and the fiercest 
blasts of winter are produced by the unequal heating of air. We have 
seen that the air nearest to a stove or hot object becomes hotter than 
the adjacent air, that it tends to expand and is replaced and pushed 
upward and outward by colder, heavier air falling downward. We have 
learned also that the moving liquid or gas carries with it heat which 
it gradually gives out to surrounding bodies. 

When a liquid or a gas moves away from a hot object, carrying heat 
with it, the process is called _convection_. 

Convection is responsible for winds and ocean currents, for land and 
sea breezes, and other daily phenomena. 

The Gulf Stream illustrates the transference of heat by convection. A 
large body of water is strongly heated at the equator, and then moves 
away, carrying heat with it to distant regions, such as England and 
Norway. 

Owing to the shape of the earth and its position with respect to the 
sun, different portions of the earth are unequally heated. In those 
portions where the earth is greatly heated, the air likewise will be 
heated; there will be a tendency for the air to rise, and for the cold 
air from surrounding regions to rush in to fill its place. In this way 
winds are produced. There are many circumstances which modify winds 
and currents, and it is not always easy to explain their direction 
and velocity, but one very definite cause is the unequal heating of 
the surface of the earth. 

13. Conduction. A poker used in stirring a fire becomes hot and 
heats the hand grasping the poker, although only the opposite end of 
the poker has actually been in the fire. Heat from the fire passed 
into the poker, traveled along it, and warmed it. When heat flows in 
this way from a warm part of a body to a colder part, the process is 
called _conduction_. A flatiron is heated by conduction, the heat from 
the warm stove passing into the cold flatiron and gradually heating 
it. 

In convection, air and water circulate freely, carrying heat with 
them; in conduction, heat flows from a warm region toward a cold 
==========
region, but there is no apparent motion of any kind. 

Heat travels more readily through some substances than through others. 
All metals conduct heat well; irons placed on the fire become heated 
throughout and cannot be grasped with the bare hand; iron utensils are 
frequently made with wooden handles, because wood is a poor conductor 
and does not allow heat from the iron to pass through it to the hand. 
For the same reason a burning match may be held without discomfort 
until the flame almost reaches the hand. 

Stoves and radiators are made of metal, because metals conduct heat 
readily, and as fast as heat is generated within the stove by the 
burning of fuel, or introduced into the radiator by the hot water, the 
heat is conducted through the metal and escapes into the room. 

Hot-water pipes and steam pipes are usually wrapped with a 
non-conducting substance, or insulator, such as asbestos, in order 
that the heat may not escape, but shall be retained within the pipes 
until it reaches the radiators within the rooms. 

The invention of the "Fireless Cooker" depended in part upon the 
principle of non-conduction. Two vessels, one inside the other, are 
separated by sawdust, asbestos, or other poor conducting material 
(Fig. 18). Foods are heated in the usual way to the boiling point or 
to a high temperature, and are then placed in the inner vessel. The 
heat of the food cannot escape through the non-conducting material 
which surrounds it, and hence remains in the food and slowly cooks it. 

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--A fireless cooker.] 

A very interesting experiment for the testing of the efficacy of 
non-conductors may be easily performed. Place hot water in a metal 
vessel, and note by means of a thermometer the _rapidity_ with which 
the water cools; then place water of the same temperature in a second 
metal vessel similar to the first, but surrounded by asbestos or other 
non-conducting material, and note the _slowness_ with which the 
temperature falls. 

Chemical Change, an Effect of Heat. This effect of heat has a vital 
influence on our lives, because the changes which take place when food 
==========
is cooked are due to it. The doughy mass which goes into the oven, 
comes out a light spongy loaf; the small indigestible rice grain comes 
out the swollen, fluffy, digestible grain. Were it not for the 
chemical changes brought about by heat, many of our present foods 
would be useless to man. Hundreds of common materials like glass, 
rubber, iron, aluminum, etc., are manufactured by processes which 
involve chemical action caused by heat. 




CHAPTER II 

TEMPERATURE AND HEAT 


==========
14. Temperature not a Measure of the Amount of Heat Present. If two 
similar basins containing unequal quantities of water are placed in 
the sunshine on a summer day, the smaller quantity of water will 
become quite warm in a short period of time, while the larger quantity 
will become only lukewarm. Both vessels receive the same amount of 
heat from the sun, but in one case the heat is utilized in heating to 
a high temperature a small quantity of water, while in the second case 
the heat is utilized in warming to a lower degree a larger quantity of 
water. Equal amounts of heat do not necessarily produce equivalent 
temperatures, and equal temperatures do not necessarily indicate equal 
amounts of heat. It takes more heat to raise a gallon of water to the 
boiling point than it does to raise a pint of water to the boiling 
point, but a thermometer would register the same temperature in the 
two cases. The temperature of boiling water is 100? C. whether there 
is a pint of it or a gallon. Temperature is independent of the 
quantity of matter present; but the amount of heat contained in a 
substance at any temperature is not independent of quantity, being 
greater in the larger quantity. 

15. The Unit of Heat. It is necessary to have a unit of heat just as 
we have a unit of length, or a unit of mass, or a unit of time. One 
unit of heat is called a _calorie_, and is the amount of heat which 
will change the temperature of 1 gram of water 1? C. It is the amount 
of heat given out by 1 gram of water when its temperature falls 1? C., 
or the amount of heat absorbed by 1 gram of water when its temperature 
rises 1? C. If 400 grams of water are heated from 0? to 5? C., the 
amount of heat which has entered the water is equivalent to 5 ? 400 or 
2000 calories; if 200 grams of water cool from 25? to 20? C., the heat 
given out by the water is equivalent to 5 ? 200 or 1000 calories. 

16. Some Substances Heat more readily than Others. If two equal 
quantities of water at the same temperature are exposed to the sun for 
the same length of time, their final temperatures will be the same. 
If, however, equal quantities of different substances are exposed, the 
temperatures resulting from the heating will not necessarily be the 
same. If a basin containing 1 lb. of mercury is put on the fire, side 
by side with a basin containing an equal quantity of water, the 
temperatures of the two substances will vary greatly at the end of a 
short time. The mercury will have a far higher temperature than the 
water, in spite of the fact that the amount of mercury is as great as 
the amount of water and that the heat received from the fire has been 
the same in each case. Mercury is not so difficult to heat as water; 
less heat being required to raise its temperature 1? than is required 
to raise the temperature of an equal quantity of water 1?. In fact, 
mercury is 30 times as easy to heat as water, and it requires only one 
thirtieth as much fire to heat a given quantity of mercury 1? as to 
heat the same quantity of water 1?. 

17. Specific Heat. We know that different substances are differently 
affected by heat. Some substances, like water, change their 
temperature slowly when heated; others, like mercury, change their 
temperature very rapidly when heated. The number of calories needed by 
1 gram of a substance in order that its temperature may be increased 
1? C. is called the _specific heat_ of a substance; or, specific heat 
is the number of calories given out by 1 gram of a substance when its 
temperature falls 1? C. For experiments on the determination of 
specific heat, see Laboratory Manual. 

Water has the highest specific heat of any known substance except 
hydrogen; that is, it requires more heat to raise the temperature of 
water a definite number of degrees than it does to raise the 
temperature of an equal amount of any other substance the same number 
of degrees. Practically this same thing can be stated in another way: 
Water in cooling gives out more heat than any other substance in 
cooling through the same number of degrees. For this reason water is 
used in foot warmers and in hot-water bags. If a copper lid were used 
as a foot warmer, it would give the feet only .095 as much heat as an 
equal weight of water; a lead weight only .031 as much heat as water. 
Flatirons are made of iron because of the relatively high specific 
heat of iron. The flatiron heats slowly and cools slowly, and, because 
of its high specific heat, not only supplies the laundress with 
considerable heat, but eliminates for her the frequent changing of the 
flatiron. 

18. Water and Weather. About four times as much heat is required to 
heat a given quantity of water one degree as to heat an equal quantity 
of earth. In summer, when the rocks and the sand along the shore are 
burning hot, the ocean and lakes are pleasantly cool, although the 
amount of heat present in the water is as great as that present in the 
earth. In winter, long after the rocks and sand have given out their 
heat and have become cold, the water continues to give out the vast 
store of heat accumulated during the summer. This explains why lands 
situated on or near large bodies of water usually have less variation 
in temperature than inland regions. In the summer the water cools the 
region; in the winter, on the contrary, the water heats the region, 
and hence extremes of temperature are practically unknown. 

19. Sources of Heat. Most of the heat which we enjoy and use we owe 
to the sun. The wood which blazes on the hearth, the coal which glows 
in the furnace, and the oil which burns in the stove owe their 
existence to the sun. 

Without the warmth of the sun seeds could not sprout and develop into 
the mighty trees which yield firewood. Even coal, which lies buried 
thousands of feet below the earth's surface, owes its existence in 
part to the sun. Coal is simply buried vegetation,--vegetation which 
sprouted and grew under the influence of the sun's warm rays. Ages ago 
trees and bushes grew "thick and fast," and the ground was always 
covered with a deep layer of decaying vegetable matter. In time some 
of this vast supply sank into the moist soil and became covered with 
mud. Then rock formed, and the rock pressed down upon the sunken 
vegetation. The constant pressure, the moisture in the ground, and 
heat affected the underground vegetable mass, and slowly changed it 
into coal. 

The buried forest and thickets were not all changed into coal. Some 
were changed into oil and gas. Decaying animal matter was often mixed 
with the vegetable mass. When the mingled animal and vegetable matter 
sank into moist earth and came under the influence of pressure, it was 
slowly changed into oil and gas. 

The heat of our bodies comes from the foods which we eat. Fruits, 
grain, etc., could not grow without the warmth and the light of the 
sun. The animals which supply our meats likewise depend upon the sun 
for light and warmth. 

The sun, therefore, is the great source of heat; whether it is the 
heat which comes directly from the sun and warms the atmosphere, or 
the heat which comes from burning coal, wood, and oil. 




CHAPTER III 

OTHER FACTS ABOUT HEAT 


20. Boiling. _Heat absorbed in Boiling_. If a kettle of water is 
placed above a flame, the temperature of the water gradually 
increases, and soon small bubbles form at the bottom of the kettle and 
begin to rise through the water. At first the bubbles do not get far 
in their ascent, but disappear before they reach the surface; later, 
as the water gets hotter and hotter, the bubbles become larger and 
more numerous, rise higher and higher, and finally reach the surface 
and pass from the water into the air; steam comes from the vessel, and 
the water is said to _boil_. The temperature at which a liquid boils 
is called the boiling point. 

While the water is heating, the temperature steadily rises, but as 
soon as the water begins to boil the thermometer reading becomes 
stationary and does not change, no matter how hard the water boils and 
in spite of the fact that heat from the flame is constantly passing 
into the water. 

If the flame is removed from the boiling water for but a second, the 
boiling ceases; if the flame is replaced, the boiling begins again 
immediately. Unless heat is constantly supplied, water at the boiling 
point cannot be transformed into steam. 

_The number of calories which must be supplied to 1 gram of water at 
the boiling point in order to change it into steam at the same 
temperature is called the heat of vaporization_; it is the heat 
necessary to change 1 gram of water at the boiling point into steam of 
the same temperature. 

21. The Amount of Heat Absorbed. The amount of heat which must be 
constantly supplied to water at the boiling point in order to change 
it into steam is far greater than we realize. If we put a beaker of 
ice water (water at 0? C.) over a steady flame, and note (1) the time 
which elapses before the water begins to boil, and (2) the time which 
elapses before the boiling water completely boils away, we shall see 
that it takes about 5-1/4 times as long to change water into steam as 
it does to change its temperature from 0? C. to 100? C. Since, with a 
steady flame, it takes 5-1/4 times as long to change water into steam 
as it does to change its temperature from 0? C. to the boiling point, 
we conclude that it takes 5-1/4 times as much heat to convert water at 
the boiling point into steam as it does to raise it from the 
temperature of ice water to that of boiling water. 

The amount of heat necessary to raise the temperature of 1 gram of 
water 1? C. is equal to 1 calorie, and the amount necessary to raise 
the temperature 100? C. is equal to 100 calories; hence the amount of 
heat necessary to convert 1 gram of water at the boiling point into 
steam at that same temperature is equal to approximately 525 calories. 
Very careful experiments show the exact heat of vaporization to be 
536.1 calories. (See Laboratory Manual.) 

22. General Truths. Statements similar to the above hold for other 
liquids and for solutions. If milk is placed upon a stove, the 
temperature rises steadily until the boiling point is reached; further 
heating produces, not a change in temperature, but a change of the 
water of the milk into steam. As soon as the milk, or any other liquid 
food, comes to a boil, the gas flame should be lowered until only an 
occasional bubble forms, because so long as any bubbles form the 
temperature is that of the boiling point, and further heat merely 
results in waste of fuel. 

We find by experiment that every liquid has its own specific boiling 
point; for example, alcohol boils at 78? C. and brine at 103? C. Both 
specific heat and the heat of vaporization vary with the liquid used. 

23. Condensation. If one holds a cold lid in the steam of boiling 
water, drops of water gather on the lid; the steam is cooled by 
contact with the cold lid and _condenses_ into water. Bottles of water 
brought from a cold cellar into a warm room become covered with a mist 
of fine drops of water, because the moisture in the air, chilled by 
contact with the cold bottles, immediately condenses into drops of 
water. Glasses filled with ice water show a similar mist. 

In Section 21, we saw that 536 calories are required to change 1 gram 
of water into steam; if, now, the steam in turn condenses into water, 
it is natural to expect a release of the heat used in transforming 
water into steam. Experiment shows not only that vapor gives out heat 
during condensation, but that the amount of heat thus set free is 
exactly equal to the amount absorbed during vaporization. (See 
Laboratory Manual.) 

We learn that the heat of vaporization is the same whether it is 
considered as the heat absorbed by 1 gram of water in its change to 
steam, or as the heat given out by 1 gram of steam during its 
==========
condensation into water. 

24. Practical Application. We understand now the value of steam as a 
heating agent. Water is heated in a boiler in the cellar, and the 
steam passes through pipes which run to the various rooms; there the 
steam condenses into water in the radiators, each gram of steam 
setting free 536 calories of heat. When we consider the size of the 
radiators and the large number of grams of steam which they contain, 
and consider further that each gram in condensing sets free 536 
calories, we understand the ease with which buildings are heated by 
steam. 

Most of us have at times profited by the heat of condensation. In cold 
weather, when there is a roaring fire in the range, the water 
frequently becomes so hot that it "steams" out of open faucets. If, at 
such times, the hot water is turned on in a small cold bathroom, and 
is allowed to run until the tub is well filled, vapor condenses on 
windows, mirrors, and walls, and the cold room becomes perceptibly 
warmer. The heat given out by the condensing steam passes into the 
surrounding air and warms the room. 

There is, however, another reason for the rise in temperature. If a 
large pail of hot soup is placed in a larger pail of cold water, the 
soup will gradually cool and the cold water will gradually become 
warmer. A red-hot iron placed on a stand gradually cools, but warms 
the stand. A hot body loses heat so long as a cooler body is near it; 
the cold object is heated at the expense of the warmer object, and one 
loses heat and the other gains heat until the temperature of both is 
the same. Now the hot water in the tub gradually loses heat and the 
cold air of the room gradually gains heat by convection, but the 
amount given the room by convection is relatively small compared with 
the large amount set free by the condensing steam. 

25. Distillation. If impure, muddy water is boiled, drops of water 
will collect on a cold plate held in the path of the steam, but the 
drops will be clear and pure. When impure water is boiled, the steam 
from it does not contain any of the impurities because these are left 
behind in the vessel. If all the water were allowed to boil away, a 
layer of mud or of other impurities would be found at the bottom of 
the vessel. Because of this fact, it is possible to purify water in a 
very simple way. Place over a fire a large kettle closed except for a 
spout which is long enough to reach across the stove and dip into a 
bottle. As the liquid boils, steam escapes through the spout, and on 
reaching the cold bottle condenses and drops into the bottle as pure 
water. The impurities remain behind in the kettle. Water freed from 
impurities in this way is called _distilled water_, and the process is 
called _distillation_ (Fig. 19). By this method, the salt water of the 
ocean may be separated into pure drinking water and salt, and many of 
the large ocean liners distill from the briny deep all the drinking 
water used on their ocean voyages. 

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--In order that the steam which passes through 
the coiled tube may be quickly cooled and condensed, cold water is 
made to circulate around the coil. The condensed steam escapes at 
==========
_w_.] 

Commercially, distillation is a very important process. Turpentine, 
for example, is made by distilling the sap of pine trees. Incisions 
are cut in the bark of the long-leaf pine trees, and these serve as 
channels for the escape of crude resin. This crude liquid is collected 
in barrels and taken to a distillery, where it is distilled into 
turpentine and rosin. The turpentine is the product which passes off 
as vapor, and the rosin is the mass left in the boiler after the 
distillation of the turpentine. 

26. Evaporation. If a stopper is left off a cologne bottle, the 
contents of the bottle will slowly evaporate; if a dish of water is 
placed out of doors on a hot day, evaporation occurs very rapidly. The 
liquids which have disappeared from the bottle and the dish have 
passed into the surrounding air in the form of vapor. In Section 20, 
we saw that water could not pass into vapor without the addition of 
heat; now the heat necessary for the evaporation of the cologne and 
water was taken from the air, leaving it slightly cooler. If wet hands 
are not dried with a towel, but are left to dry by evaporation, heat 
is taken from the hand in the process, leaving a sensation of 
coolness. Damp clothing should never be worn, because the moisture in 
it tends to evaporate at the expense of the bodily heat, and this 
undue loss of heat from the body produces chills. After a bath the 
body should be well rubbed, otherwise evaporation occurs at the 
expense of heat which the body cannot ordinarily afford to lose. 

Evaporation is a slow process occurring at all times; it is hastened 
during the summer, because of the large amount of heat present in the 
atmosphere. Many large cities make use of the cooling effect of 
evaporation to lower the temperature of the air in summer; streets are 
sprinkled not only to lay the dust, but in order that the surrounding 
air may be cooled by the evaporation of the water. 

Some thrifty housewives economize by utilizing the cooling effects of 
evaporation. Butter, cheese, and other foods sensitive to heat are 
placed in porous vessels wrapped in wet cloths. Rapid evaporation of 
the water from the wet cloths keeps the contents of the jars cool, and 
that without expense other than the muscular energy needed for wetting 
the cloths frequently. 

27. Rain, Snow, Frost, Dew. The heat of the sun causes constant 
evaporation of the waters of oceans, rivers, streams, and marshes, and 
the water vapor set free by evaporation passes into the air, which 
becomes charged with vapor or is said to be humid. Constant, unceasing 
evaporation of our lakes, streams, and pools would mean a steady 
decrease in the supply of water available for daily use, if the 
escaped water were all retained by the atmosphere and lost to the 
==========
earth. But although the escaped vapor mingles with the atmosphere, 
hovering near the earth's surface, or rising far above the level of 
the mountains, it does not remain there permanently. When this vapor 
meets a cold wind or is chilled in any way, condensation takes place, 
and a mass of tiny drops of water or of small particles of snow is 
formed. When these drops or particles become large enough, they fall 
to the earth as rain or snow, and in this way the earth is compensated 
for the great loss of moisture due to evaporation. Fog is formed when 
vapor condenses near the surface of the earth, and when the drops are 
so small that they do not fall but hover in the air, the fog is said 
"not to lift" or "not to clear." 

If ice water is poured into a glass, a mist will form on the outside 
of the glass. This is because the water vapor in the air becomes 
chilled by contact with the glass and condenses. Often leaves and 
grass and sidewalks are so cold that the water vapor in the atmosphere 
condenses on them, and we say a heavy dew has formed. If the 
temperature of the air falls to the freezing point while the dew is 
forming, the vapor is frozen and frost is seen instead of dew. 

The daily evaporation of moisture into the atmosphere keeps the 
atmosphere more or less full of water vapor; but the atmosphere can 
hold only a definite amount of vapor at a given temperature, and as 
soon as it contains the maximum amount for that temperature, further 
evaporation ceases. If clothes are hung out on a damp, murky day they 
do not dry, because the air contains all the moisture it can hold, and 
the moisture in the clothes has no chance to evaporate. When the air 
contains all the moisture it can hold, it is said to be saturated, and 
if a slight fall in temperature occurs when the air is saturated, 
condensation immediately begins in the form of rain, snow, or fog. If, 
however, the air is not saturated, a fall in temperature may occur 
without producing precipitation. The temperature at which air is 
saturated and condensation begins is called the _dew point_. 

28. How Chills are Caused. The discomfort we feel in an overcrowded 
room is partly due to an excess of moisture in the air, resulting from 
the breathing and perspiration of many persons. The air soon becomes 
saturated with vapor and cannot take away the perspiration from our 
bodies, and our clothing becomes moist and our skin tender. When we 
leave the crowded "tea" or lecture and pass into the colder, drier, 
outside air, clothes and skin give up their load of moisture through 
sudden evaporation. But evaporation requires heat, and this heat is 
taken from our bodies, and a chill results. 

Proper ventilation would eliminate much of the physical danger of 
social events; fresh, dry air should be constantly admitted to crowded 
rooms in order to replace the air saturated by the breath and 
perspiration of the occupants. 

29. Weather Forecasts. When the air is near the saturation point, 
the weather is oppressive and is said to be very humid. For comfort 
and health, the air should be about two thirds saturated. The presence 
of some water vapor in the air is absolutely necessary to animal and 
plant life. In desert regions where vapor is scarce the air is so dry 
==========
that throat trouble accompanied by disagreeable tickling is prevalent; 
fallen leaves become so dry that they crumble to dust; plants lose 
their freshness and beauty. 

The likelihood of rain or frost is often determined by temperature and 
humidity. If the air is near saturation and the temperature is 
falling, it is safe to predict bad weather, because the fall of 
temperature will probably cause rapid condensation, and hence rain. 
If, however, the air is not near the saturation point, a fall in 
temperature will not necessarily produce bad weather. 

The measurement of humidity is of far wider importance than the mere 
forecasting of local weather conditions. The close relation between 
humidity and health has led many institutions, such as hospitals, 
schools, and factories, to regulate the humidity of the atmosphere as 
carefully as they do the temperature. Too great humidity is 
enervating, and not conducive to either mental or physical exertion; 
on the other hand, too dry air is equally harmful. In summer the 
humidity conditions cannot be well regulated, but in winter, when 
houses are artificially heated, the humidity of a room can be 
==========
increased by placing pans of water near the registers or on radiators. 

30. Heat Needed to Melt Substances. If a spoon is placed in a vessel 
of hot water for a few seconds and then removed, it will be warmer 
than before it was placed in the hot water. If a lump of melting ice 
is placed in the vessel of hot water and then removed, the ice will 
not be warmer than before, but there will be less of it. The heat of 
the water has been used in melting the ice, not in changing its 
temperature. 

If, on a bitter cold day, a pail of snow is brought into a warm room 
and a thermometer is placed in the snow, the temperature rises 
gradually until 32? F. is reached, when it becomes stationary, and the 
snow begins to melt. If the pail is put on the fire, the temperature 
still remains 32?F., but the snow melts more rapidly. As soon as all 
the snow is completely melted, however, the temperature begins to rise 
and rises steadily until the water boils, when it again becomes 
stationary and remains so during the passage of water into vapor. 

We see that heat must be supplied to ice at 0? C. or 32? F. in order 
to change it into water, and further, that the temperature of the 
mixture does not rise so long as any ice is present, no matter how 
much heat is supplied. The amount of heat necessary to melt 1 gram of 
ice is easily calculated. (See Laboratory Manual.) 

Heat must be supplied to ice to melt it. On the other hand, water, in 
freezing, loses heat, and the amount of heat lost by freezing water is 
exactly equal to the amount of heat absorbed by melting ice. 

The number of units of heat required to melt a unit mass of ice is 
called the _heat of fusion_ of water. 

31. Climate. Water, in freezing, loses heat, even though its 
temperature remains at 0? C. Because water loses heat when it freezes, 
the presence of large streams of water greatly influences the climate 
of a region. In winter the heat from the freezing water keeps the 
temperature of the surrounding higher than it would naturally be, and 
consequently the cold weather is less severe. In summer water 
evaporates, heat is taken from the air, and consequently the warm 
==========
weather is less intense. 

32. Molding of Glass and Forging of Iron. The fire which is hot 
enough to melt a lump of ice may not be hot enough to melt an iron 
poker; on the other hand, it may be sufficiently hot to melt a tin 
spoon. Different substances melt, or liquefy, at different 
temperatures; for example, ice melts at 0? C., and tin at 233? C., 
while iron requires the relatively high temperature of 1200? C. Most 
substances have a definite melting or freezing point which never 
changes so long as the surrounding conditions remain the same. 

But while most substances have a definite melting point, some 
substances do not. If a glass rod is held in a Bunsen burner, it will 
gradually grow softer and softer, and finally a drop of molten glass 
will fall from the end of the rod into the fire. The glass did not 
suddenly become a liquid at a definite temperature; instead it 
softened gradually, and then melted. While glass is in the soft, 
yielding, pliable state, it is molded into dishes, bottles, and other 
useful objects, such as lamp shades, globes, etc. (Fig. 20). If glass 
melted at a definite temperature, it could not be molded in this way. 
Iron acts in a similar manner, and because of this property the 
blacksmith can shape his horseshoes, and the workman can make his 
engines and other articles of daily service to man. 

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Molten glass being rolled into a form 
suitable for window panes.] 

33. Strange Behavior of Water. One has but to remember that bottles 
==========
of water burst when they freeze, and that ice floats on water like 
wood, to know that water expands on freezing or on solidifying. A 
quantity of water which occupies 100 cubic feet of space will, on 
becoming ice, need 109 cubic feet of space. On a cold winter night the 
water sometimes freezes in the water pipes, and the pipes burst. Water 
is very peculiar in expanding on solidification, because most 
substances contract on solidifying; gelatin and jelly, for example, 
contract so much that they shrink from the sides of the dish which 
contains them. 

If water contracted in freezing, ice would be heavier than water and 
would sink in ponds and lakes as fast as it formed, and our streams 
and ponds would become masses of solid ice, killing all animal and 
plant life. But the ice is lighter than water and floats on top, and 
animals in the water beneath are as free to live and swim as they were 
in the warm sunny days of summer. The most severe winter cannot freeze 
a deep lake solid, and in the coldest weather a hole made in the ice 
will show water beneath the surface. Our ice boats cut and break the 
ice of the river, and through the water beneath our boats daily ply 
their way to and fro, independent of winter and its blighting blasts. 

While most of us are familiar with the bursting of water pipes on a 
cold night, few of us realize the influence which freezing water 
exerts on the character of the land around us. 

Water sinks into the ground and, on the approach of winter, freezes, 
expanding about one tenth of its volume; the expanding ice pushes the 
earth aside, the force in some cases being sufficient to dislodge even 
huge rocks. In the early days in New England it was said by the 
farmers that "rocks grew," because fields cleared of stones in the 
fall became rock covered with the approach of spring; the rocks and 
stones hidden underground and unseen in the fall were forced to the 
surface by the winter's expansion. We have all seen fence posts and 
bricks pushed out of place because of the heaving of the soil beneath 
them. Often householders must relay their pavements and walks because 
of the damage done by freezing water. 

The most conspicuous effect of the expansive power of freezing water 
is seen in rocky or mountainous regions (Fig. 21). Water easily finds 
entrance into the cracks and crevices of the rocks, where it lodges 
until frozen; then it expands and acts like a wedge, widening cracks, 
chiseling off edges, and even breaking rocks asunder. In regions where 
frequent frosts occur, the destructive action of water works constant 
changes in the appearance of the land; small cracks and crevices are 
enlarged, massive rocks are pried up out of position, huge slabs are 
split off, and particles large and small are forced from the parent 
rock. The greater part of the debris and rubbish brought down from the 
mountain slopes by the spring rains owes its origin to the fact that 
water expands when it freezes. 

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--The destruction caused by freezing water.] 

34. Heat Necessary to Dissolve a Substance. It requires heat to 
dissolve any substance, just as it requires heat to change ice to 
water. If a handful of common salt is placed in a small cup of water 
and stirred with a thermometer, the temperature of the mixture falls 
several degrees. This is just what one would expect, because the heat 
needed to liquefy the salt must come from somewhere, and naturally it 
comes from the water, thereby lowering the temperature of the water. 
We know very well that potatoes cease boiling if a pinch of salt is 
put in the water; this is because the temperature of the water has 
been lowered by the amount of heat necessary to dissolve the salt. 

Let some snow or chopped ice be placed in a vessel and mixed with one 
third its weight of coarse salt; if then a small tube of cold water is 
placed in this mixture, the water in the test tube will soon freeze 
solid. As soon as the snow and salt are mixed they melt. The heat 
necessary for this comes in part from the air and in part from the 
water in the test tube, and the water in the tube becomes in 
consequence cold enough to freeze. But the salt mixture does not 
freeze because its freezing point is far below that of pure water. The 
use of salt and ice in ice-cream freezers is a practical application 
of this principle. The heat necessary for melting the mixture of salt 
and ice is taken from the cream which thus becomes cold enough to 
==========
freeze. 




CHAPTER IV 

BURNING OR OXIDATION 


35. Why Things Burn. The heat of our bodies comes from the food we 
eat; the heat for cooking and for warming our houses comes from coal. 
The production of heat through the burning of coal, or oil, or gas, or 
wood, is called combustion. Combustion cannot occur without the 
presence of a substance called oxygen, which exists rather abundantly 
in the air; that is, one fifth of our atmosphere consists of this 
substance which we call oxygen. We throw open our windows to allow 
fresh air to enter, and we take walks in order to breathe the pure air 
into our lungs. What we need for the energy and warmth of our bodies 
is the oxygen in the air. Whether we burn gas or wood or coal, the 
heat which is produced comes from the power which these various 
substances possess to combine with oxygen. We open the draft of a 
stove that it may "draw well": that it may secure oxygen for burning. 
We throw a blanket over burning material to smother the fire: to keep 
oxygen away from it. Burning, or oxidation, is combining with oxygen, 
and the more oxygen you add to a fire, the hotter the fire will burn, 
and the faster. The effect of oxygen on combustion may be clearly seen 
by thrusting a smoldering splinter into a jar containing oxygen; the 
smoldering splinter will instantly flare and blaze, while if it is 
removed from the jar, it loses its flame and again burns quietly. 
Oxygen for this experiment can be produced in the following way. 

[Illustration: FIG. 22.--Preparing oxygen from potassium chlorate and 
==========
manganese dioxide.] 

36. How to Prepare Oxygen. Mix a small quantity of potassium 
chlorate with an equal amount of manganese dioxide and place the 
mixture in a strong test tube. Close the mouth of the tube with a 
one-hole rubber stopper in which is fitted a long, narrow tube, and 
clamp the test tube to an iron support, as shown in Figure 22. Fill 
the trough with water until the shelf is just covered and allow the 
end of the delivery tube to rest just beneath the hole in the shelf. 
Fill a medium-sized bottle with water, cover it with a glass plate, 
invert the bottle in the trough, and then remove the glass plate. Heat 
the test tube very gently, and when gas bubbles out of the tube, slip 
the bottle over the opening in the shelf, so that the tube runs into 
the bottle. The gas will force out the water and will finally fill the 
bottle. When all the water has been forced out, slip the glass plate 
under the mouth of the bottle and remove the bottle from the trough. 
The gas in the bottle is oxygen. 

Everywhere in a large city or in a small village, smoke is seen, 
indicating the presence of fire; hence there must exist a large supply 
of oxygen to keep all the fires alive. The supply of oxygen needed 
for the fires of the world comes largely from the atmosphere. 

==========
37. Matches. The burning material is ordinarily set on fire by 
matches, thin strips of wood tipped with sulphur or phosphorus, or 
both. Phosphorus can unite with oxygen at a fairly low temperature, 
and if phosphorus is rubbed against a rough surface, the friction 
produced will raise the temperature of the phosphorus to a point where 
it can combine with oxygen. The burning phosphorus kindles the wood of 
the match, and from the burning match the fire is kindled. If you want 
to convince yourself that friction produces heat, rub a cent 
vigorously against your coat and note that the cent becomes warm. 
Matches have been in use less than a hundred years. Primitive man 
kindled his camp fire by rubbing pieces of dry wood together until 
they took fire, and this method is said to be used among some isolated 
distant tribes at the present time. A later and easier way was to 
strike flint and steel together and to catch the spark thus produced 
on tinder or dry fungus. Within the memory of some persons now living, 
the tinder box was a valuable asset to the home, particularly in the 
pioneer regions of the West. 

38. Safety Matches. Ordinary phosphorus, while excellent as a 
fire-producing material, is dangerously poisonous, and those to whom 
the dipping of wooden strips into phosphorus is a daily occupation 
suffer with a terrible disease which usually attacks the teeth and 
bones of the jaw. The teeth rot and fall out, abscesses form, and 
bones and flesh begin to decay; the only way to prevent the spread of 
the disease is to remove the affected bone, and in some instances it 
has been necessary to remove the entire jaw. Then, too, matches made 
of yellow or white phosphorus ignite easily, and, when rubbed against 
any rough surface, are apt to take fire. Many destructive fires have 
been started by the accidental friction of such matches against rough 
surfaces. 

For these reasons the introduction of the so-called safety match was 
an important event. When common phosphorus, in the dangerous and 
easily ignited form, is heated in a closed vessel to about 250? C., it 
gradually changes to a harmless red mass. The red phosphorus is not 
only harmless, but it is difficult to ignite, and, in order to be 
ignited by friction, must be rubbed on a surface rich in oxygen. The 
head of a safety match is coated with a mixture of glue and 
oxygen-containing compounds; the surface on which the match is to be 
rubbed is coated with a mixture of red phosphorus and glue, to which 
finely powdered glass is sometimes added in order to increase the 
friction. Unless the head of the match is rubbed on the prepared 
phosphorus coating, ignition does not occur, and accidental fires are 
avoided. 

Various kinds of safety matches have been manufactured in the last few 
years, but they are somewhat more expensive than the ordinary form, 
and hence manufacturers are reluctant to substitute them for the 
cheaper matches. Some foreign countries, such as Switzerland, prohibit 
the sale of the dangerous type, and it is hoped that the United States 
will soon follow the lead of these countries in demanding the sale of 
safety matches only. 
==========

39. Some Unfamiliar Forms of Burning. While most of us think of 
burning as a process in which flames and smoke occur, there are in 
reality many modes of burning accompanied by neither flame nor smoke. 
Iron, for example, burns when it rusts, because it slowly combines 
with the oxygen of the air and is transformed into new substances. 
When the air is dry, iron does not unite with oxygen, but when 
moisture is present in the air, the iron unites with the oxygen and 
turns into iron rust. The burning is slow and unaccompanied by the 
fire and smoke so familiar to us, but the process is none the less 
burning, or combination with oxygen. Burning which is not accompanied 
by any of the appearances of ordinary burning is known as oxidation. 

The tendency of iron to rust lessens its efficiency and value, and 
many devices have been introduced to prevent rusting. A coating of 
paint or varnish is sometimes applied to iron in order to prevent 
contact with air. The galvanizing of iron is another attempt to secure 
the same result; in this process iron is dipped into molten zinc, 
thereby acquiring a coating of zinc, and forming what is known as 
galvanized iron. Zinc does not combine with oxygen under ordinary 
circumstances, and hence galvanized iron is immune from rust. 

Decay is a process of oxidation; the tree which rots slowly away is 
undergoing oxidation, and the result of the slow burning is the 
decomposed matter which we see and the invisible gases which pass into 
the atmosphere. The log which blazes on our hearth gives out 
sufficient heat to warm us; the log which decays in the forest gives 
out an equivalent amount of heat, but the heat is evolved so slowly 
that we are not conscious of it. Burning accompanied by a blaze and 
intense heat is a rapid process; burning unaccompanied by fire and 
appreciable heat is a slow, gradual process, requiring days, weeks, 
and even long years for its completion. 

Another form of oxidation occurs daily in the human body. In Section 
35 we saw that the human body is an engine whose fuel is food; the 
burning of that food in the body furnishes the heat necessary for 
bodily warmth and the energy required for thought and action. Oxygen 
is essential to burning, and the food fires within the body are kept 
alive by the oxygen taken into the body at every breath by the lungs. 
==========
We see now one reason for an abundance of fresh air in daily life. 

40. How to Breathe. Air, which is essential to life and health, 
should enter the body through the nose and _not through the mouth_. 
The peculiar nature and arrangement of the membranes of the nose 
enable the nostrils to clean, and warm, and moisten the air which 
passes through them to the lungs. Floating around in the atmosphere 
are dust particles which ought not to get into the lungs. The nose is 
provided with small hairs and a moist inner membrane which serve as 
filters in removing solid particles from the air, and in thus 
purifying it before its entrance into the lungs. 

In the immediate neighborhood of three Philadelphia high schools, 
having an approximate enrollment of over 8000 pupils, is a huge 
manufacturing plant which day and night pours forth grimy smoke and 
soot into the atmosphere which must supply oxygen to this vast group 
of young lives. If the vital importance of nose breathing is impressed 
upon these young people, the harmful effect of the foul air may be 
greatly lessened, the smoke particles and germs being held back by the 
nose filters and never reaching the lungs. If, however, this principle 
of hygiene is not brought to their attention, the dangerous habit of 
breathing through the open, or at least partially open, mouth will 
continue, and objectionable matter will pass through the mouth and 
find a lodging place in the lungs. 

There is another very important reason why nose breathing is 
preferable to mouth breathing. The temperature of the human body is 
approximately 98? F., and the air which enters the lungs should not be 
far below this temperature. If air reaches the lungs through the nose, 
its journey is relatively long and slow, and there is opportunity for 
it to be warmed before it reaches the lungs. If, on the other hand, 
air passes to the lungs by way of the mouth, the warming process is 
brief and insufficient, and the lungs suffer in consequence. 
Naturally, the gravest danger is in winter. 

41. Cause of Mouth Breathing. Some people find it difficult to 
breathe through the nostrils on account of growths, called adenoids, 
in the nose. If you have a tendency toward mouth breathing, let a 
physician examine your nose and throat. 

Adenoids not only obstruct breathing and weaken the whole system 
==========
through lack of adequate air, but they also press upon the blood 
vessels and nerves of the head and interfere with normal brain 
development. Moreover, they interfere in many cases with the hearing, 
and in general hinder activity and growth. The removal of adenoids is 
simple, and carries with it only temporary pain and no danger. Some 
physicians claim that the growths disappear in later years, but even 
if that is true, the physical and mental development of earlier years 
is lost, and the person is backward in the struggle for life and 
achievement. 

[Illustration: FIG. 23.--Intelligent expression is often lacking in 
children with adenoid growths.] 

42. How to Build a Fire. Substances differ greatly as to the ease 
==========
with which they may be made to burn or, in technical terms, with which 
they may be made to unite with oxygen. For this reason, we put light 
materials, like shavings, chips, and paper, on the grate, twisting the 
latter and arranging it so that air (oxygen in the air) can reach a 
large surface; upon this we place small sticks of wood, piling them 
across each other so as to allow entrance for the oxygen; and finally 
upon this we place our hard wood or coal. 

The coal and the large sticks cannot be kindled with a match, but the 
paper and shavings can, and these in burning will heat the large 
sticks until they take fire and in turn kindle the coal. 

43. Spontaneous Combustion. We often hear of fires "starting 
themselves," and sometimes the statement is true. If a pile of oily 
rags is allowed to stand for a time, the oily matter will begin to 
combine slowly with oxygen and as a result will give off heat. The 
heat thus given off is at first insufficient to kindle a fire; but as 
the heat is retained and accumulated, the temperature rises, and 
finally the kindling point is reached and the whole mass bursts into 
flames. For safety's sake, all oily cloths should be burned or kept in 
metal vessels. 

44. The Treatment of Burns. In spite of great caution, burns from 
fires, steam, or hot water do sometimes occur, and it is well to know 
how to relieve the suffering caused by them and how to treat the 
injury in order to insure rapid healing. 

Burns are dangerous because they destroy skin and thus open up an 
entrance into the body for disease germs, and in addition because they 
lay bare nerve tissue which thereby becomes irritated and causes a 
==========
shock to the entire system. 

In mild burns, where the skin is not broken but is merely reddened, an 
application of moist baking soda brings immediate relief. If this 
substance is not available, flour paste, lard, sweet oil, or vaseline 
may be used. 

In more severe burns, where blisters are formed, the blisters should 
be punctured with a sharp, sterilized needle and allowed to discharge 
their watery contents before the above remedies are applied. 

In burns severe enough to destroy the skin, disinfection of the open 
wound with weak carbolic acid or hydrogen peroxide is very necessary. 
After this has been done, a soft cloth soaked in a solution of linseed 
oil and limewater should be applied and the whole bandaged. In such a 
case, it is important not to use cotton batting, since this sticks to 
the rough surface and causes pain when removed. 

==========
45. Carbon Dioxide. _A Product of Burning._ When any fuel, such as 
coal, gas, oil, or wood, burns, it sends forth gases into the 
surrounding atmosphere. These gases, like air, are invisible, and were 
unknown to us for a long time. The chief gas formed by a burning 
substance is called carbon dioxide (CO_2) because it is composed of 
one part of carbon and two parts of oxygen. This gas has the 
distinction of being the most widely distributed gaseous compound of 
the entire world; it is found in the ocean depths and on the mountain 
heights, in brilliantly lighted rooms, and most abundantly in 
manufacturing towns where factory chimneys constantly pour forth hot 
gases and smoke. 

Wood and coal, and in fact all animal and vegetable matter, contain 
carbon, and when these substances burn or decay, the carbon in them 
unites with oxygen and forms carbon dioxide. 

The food which we eat is either animal or vegetable, and it is made 
ready for bodily use by a slow process of burning within the body; 
carbon dioxide accompanies this bodily burning of food just as it 
accompanies the fires with which we are more familiar. The carbon 
dioxide thus produced within the body escapes into the atmosphere with 
the breath. 

We see that the source of carbon dioxide is practically inexhaustible, 
coming as it does from every stove, furnace, and candle, and further 
with every breath of a living organism. 

46. Danger of Carbon Dioxide. When carbon dioxide occurs in large 
quantities, it is dangerous to health, because it interferes with 
normal breathing, lessening the escape of waste matter through the 
breath and preventing the access to the lungs of the oxygen necessary 
for life. Carbon dioxide is not poisonous, but it cuts off the supply 
of oxygen, just as water cuts it off from a drowning man. 

Since every man, woman, and child constantly breathes forth carbon 
==========
dioxide, the danger in overcrowded rooms is great, and proper 
ventilation is of vital importance. 

47. Ventilation. In estimating the quantity of air necessary to keep 
a room well aired, we must take into account the number of lights 
(electric lights do not count) to be used, and the number of people to 
occupy the room. The average house should provide at the _minimum_ 600 
cubic feet of space for each person, and in addition, arrangements for 
allowing at least 300 cubic feet of fresh air per person to enter 
every hour. 

In houses which have not a ventilating system, the air should be kept 
fresh by intelligent action in the opening of doors and windows; and 
since relatively few houses are equipped with a satisfactory system, 
the following suggestions relative to intelligent ventilation are 
offered. 

1. Avoid drafts in ventilation. 

2. Ventilate on the sheltered side of the house. If the wind is 
blowing from the north, open south windows. 

==========
48. What Becomes of the Carbon Dioxide. When we reflect that carbon 
dioxide is constantly being supplied to the atmosphere and that it is 
injurious to health, the question naturally arises as to how the air 
remains free enough of the gas to support life. This is largely 
because carbon dioxide is an essential food of plants. Through their 
leaves plants absorb it from the atmosphere, and by a wonderful 
process break it up into its component parts, oxygen and carbon. They 
reject the oxygen, which passes back to the air, but they retain the 
carbon, which becomes a part of the plant structure. Plants thus serve 
to keep the atmosphere free from an excess of carbon dioxide and, in 
addition, furnish oxygen to the atmosphere. 

[Illustration: FIG. 24.--Making carbon dioxide from marble and 
hydrochloric acid.] 

49. How to Obtain Carbon Dioxide. There are several ways in which 
carbon dioxide can be produced commercially, but for laboratory use 
the simplest is to mix in a test tube powdered marble, or chalk, and 
hydrochloric acid, and to collect the effervescing gas as shown in 
Figure 24. The substance which remains in the test tube after the gas 
has passed off is a solution of a salt and water. From a mixture of 
hydrochloric acid (HCl) and marble are obtained a salt, water, and 
carbon dioxide, the desired gas. 

50. A Commercial Use of Carbon Dioxide. If a lighted splinter is 
thrust into a test tube containing carbon dioxide, it is promptly 
extinguished, because carbon dioxide cannot support combustion; if a 
stream of carbon dioxide and water falls upon a fire, it acts like a 
blanket, covering the flames and extinguishing them. The value of a 
fire extinguisher depends upon the amount of carbon dioxide and water 
which it can furnish. A fire extinguisher is a metal case containing a 
solution of bicarbonate of soda, and a glass vessel full of strong 
sulphuric acid. As long as the extinguisher is in an upright position, 
these substances are kept separate, but when the extinguisher is 
inverted, the acid escapes from the bottle, and mixes with the soda 
solution. The mingling liquids interact and liberate carbon dioxide. 
A part of the gas thus liberated dissolves in the water of the soda 
solution and escapes from the tube with the outflowing liquid, while a 
portion remains undissolved and escapes as a stream of gas. The fire 
extinguisher is therefore the source of a liquid containing the 
fire-extinguishing substance and further the source of a stream of 
carbon dioxide gas. 

[Illustration: FIG. 25.--Inside view of a fire extinguisher.] 

51. Carbon. Although carbon dioxide is very injurious to health, 
both of the substances of which it is composed are necessary to life. 
We ourselves, our bones and flesh in particular, are partly carbon, 
and every animal, no matter how small or insignificant, contains some 
carbon; while the plants around us, the trees, the grass, the flowers, 
contain a by no means meager quantity of carbon. 

Carbon plays an important and varied role in our life, and, in some 
one of its many forms, enters into the composition of most of the 
substances which are of service and value to man. The food we eat, the 
clothes we wear, the wood and coal we burn, the marble we employ in 
building, the indispensable soap, and the ornamental diamond, all 
contain carbon in some form. 

52. Charcoal. One of the most valuable forms of carbon is charcoal; 
==========
valuable not in the sense that it costs hundreds of dollars, but in 
the more vital sense, that its use adds to the cleanliness, comfort, 
and health of man. 

The foul, bad-smelling gases which arise from sewers can be prevented 
from escaping and passing to streets and buildings by placing charcoal 
filters at the sewer exits. Charcoal is porous and absorbs foul gases, 
and thus keeps the region surrounding sewers sweet and clean and free 
of odor. Good housekeepers drop small bits of charcoal into vases of 
flowers to prevent discoloration of the water and the odor of decaying 
stems. 

If impure water filters through charcoal, it emerges pure, having left 
its impurities in the pores of the charcoal. Practically all household 
filters of drinking water are made of charcoal. But such a device may 
be a source of disease instead of a prevention of disease, unless the 
filter is regularly cleaned or renewed. This is because the pores soon 
become clogged with the impurities, and unless they are cleaned, the 
water which flows through the filter passes through a bed of 
impurities and becomes contaminated rather than purified. Frequent 
cleansing or renewal of the filter removes this difficulty. 

Commercially, charcoal is used on a large scale in the refining of 
sugars, sirups, and oils. Sugar, whether it comes from the maple tree, 
or the sugar cane, or the beet, is dark colored. It is whitened by 
passage through filters of finely pulverized charcoal. Cider and 
vinegar are likewise cleared by passage through charcoal. 

The value of carbon, in the form of charcoal, as a purifier is very 
great, whether we consider it a deodorizer, as in the case of the 
sewage, or a decolorizer, as in the case of the refineries, or whether 
we consider the service it has rendered man in the elimination of 
danger from drinking water. 
==========

53. How Charcoal is Made. Charcoal may be made by heating wood in an 
oven to which air does not have free access. The absence of air 
prevents ordinary combustion, nevertheless the intense heat affects 
the wood and changes it into new substances, one of which is charcoal. 

The wood which smolders on the hearth and in the stove is charcoal in 
the making. Formerly wood was piled in heaps, covered with sod or sand 
to prevent access of oxygen, and then was set fire to; the smoldering 
wood, cut off from an adequate supply of air, was slowly transformed 
into charcoal. Scattered over the country one still finds isolated 
charcoal kilns, crude earthen receptacles, in which wood thus deprived 
of air was allowed to smolder and form charcoal. To-day charcoal is 
made commercially by piling wood on steel cars and then pushing the 
cars into strong walled chambers. The chambers are closed to prevent 
access of air, and heated to a high temperature. The intense heat 
transforms the wood into charcoal in a few hours. A student can make 
in the laboratory sufficient charcoal for art lessons by heating in an 
earthen vessel wood buried in sand. The process will be slow, however, 
because the heat furnished by a Bunsen burner is not great, and the 
wood is transformed slowly. 

A form of charcoal known as animal charcoal, or bone black, is 
obtained from the charred remains of animals rather than plants, and 
may be prepared by burning bones and animal refuse as in the case of 
the wood. 

Destructive Distillation. When wood is burned without sufficient 
air, it is changed into soft brittle charcoal, which is very different 
from wood. It weighs only one fourth as much as the original wood. It 
is evident that much matter must leave the wood during the process of 
charcoal making. We can prove this by putting some dry shavings in a 
strong test tube fitted with a delivery tube. When the wood is heated 
==========
a gas passes off which we may collect and burn. Other substances also 
come off in gaseous form, but they condense in the water. Among these 
are wood alcohol, wood tar, and acetic acid. In the older method of 
charcoal making all these products were lost. Can you give any uses of 
these substances? 

54. Matter and Energy. When wood is burned, a small pile of ashes is 
left, and we think of the bulk of the wood as destroyed. It is true we 
have less matter that is available for use or that is visible to 
sight, but, nevertheless, no matter has been destroyed. The matter of 
which the wood is composed has merely changed its character, some of 
it is in the condition of ashes, and some in the condition of 
invisible gases, such as carbon dioxide, but none of it has been 
destroyed. It is a principle of science that matter can neither be 
destroyed nor created; it can only be changed, or transformed, and it 
is our business to see that we do not heedlessly transform it into 
substances which are valueless to us and our descendants; as, for 
example, when our magnificent forests are recklessly wasted. The 
smoke, gases, and ashes left in the path of a raging forest fire are 
no compensation to us for the valuable timber destroyed. The sum total 
of matter has not been changed, but the amount of matter which man can 
use has been greatly lessened. 
==========

The principle just stated embodies one of the fundamental laws of 
science, called the law of the _conservation of matter_. 

A similar law holds for energy as well. We can transform electric 
energy into the motion of trolley cars, or we can make use of the 
energy of streams to turn the wheels of our mills, but in all these 
cases we are transforming, not creating, energy. 

When a ball is fired from a rifle, most of the energy of the gunpowder 
is utilized in motion, but some is dissipated in producing a flash and 
a report, and in heat. The energy of the gunpowder has been scattered, 
but the sum of the various forms of energy is equal to the energy 
originally stored away in the powder. The better the gun is, the less 
will be the energy dissipated in smoke and heat and noise. 




CHAPTER V 

==========
FOOD 


55. The Body as a Machine. Wholesome food and fresh air are 
necessary for a healthy body. Many housewives, through ignorance, 
supply to their hard-working husbands and their growing sons and 
daughters food which satisfies the appetite, but which does not give 
to the body the elements needed for daily work and growth. Some foods, 
such as lettuce, cucumbers, and watermelons, make proper and 
satisfactory changes in diet, but are not strength giving. Other 
foods, like peas and beans, not only satisfy the appetite, but supply 
to the body abundant nourishment. Many immigrants live cheaply and 
well with beans and bread as their main diet. 

It is of vital importance that the relative value of different foods 
as heat producers be known definitely; and just as the yard measures 
length and the pound measures weight the calorie is used to measure 
the amount of heat which a food is capable of furnishing to the body. 
Our bodies are human machines, and, like all other machines, require 
fuel for their maintenance. The fuel supplied to an engine is not all 
available for pulling the cars; a large portion of the fuel is lost in 
smoke, and another portion is wasted as ashes. So it is with the fuel 
that runs the body. The food we eat is not all available for 
nourishment, much of it being as useless to us as are smoke and ashes 
to an engine. The best foods are those which do the most for us with 
the least possible waste. 

56. Fuel Value. By fuel value is meant the capacity foods have for 
yielding heat to the body. The fuel value of the foods we eat daily is 
so important a factor in life that physicians, dietitians, nurses, 
and those having the care of institutional cooking acquaint themselves 
with the relative fuel values of practically all of the important food 
substances. The life or death of a patient may be determined by the 
patient's diet, and the working and earning capacity of a father 
depends largely upon his prosaic three meals. An ounce of fat, whether 
it is the fat of meat or the fat of olive oil or the fat of any other 
food, produces in the body two and a quarter times as much heat as an 
ounce of starch. Of the vegetables, beans provide the greatest 
nourishment at the least cost, and to a large extent may be 
substituted for meat. It is not uncommon to find an outdoor laborer 
consuming one pound of beans per day, and taking meat only on "high 
days and holidays." 

[Illustration: FIG. 26.--The bomb calorimeter from which the fuel 
value of food can be estimated.] 

The fuel value of a food is determined by means of the _bomb 
calorimeter_ (Fig. 26). The food substance is put into a chamber _A_ 
and ignited, and the heat of the burning substance raises the 
temperature of the water in the surrounding vessel. If 1000 grams of 
water are in the vessel, and the temperature of the water is raised 2? 
C., the number of calories produced by the substance would be 2000, 
and the fuel value would be 2000 calories.[A] From this the fuel value 
of one quart or one pound of the substance can be determined, and the 
food substance will be said to furnish the body with that number of 
heat units, providing all of the pound of food were properly digested. 

[Footnote A: As applied to food, the calorie is greater than that used 
in the ordinary laboratory work, being the amount of heat necessary to 
raise the temperature of 1000 grams of water 1? C., rather than 1 gram 
1? C.] 

TABLE SHOWING THE NUMBER OF CALORIES FURNISHED BY 
ONE POUND OF VARIOUS FOODS 
==========
---------------------------------------------------- 
|FOOD |CALORIES|FOOD |CALORIES| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Leg of lean mutton | 790|Carrots | 210| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Rib of beef | 1150|Lettuce | 90| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Shad | 380|Onion | 225| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Chicken | 505|Cucumber | 80| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Apples | 290|Almonds | 3030| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Bananas | 460|Walnuts | 3306| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Prunes | 370|Peanuts | 2560| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Watermelons | 140|Oatmeal | 4673| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Lima beans | 570|Rolled wheat | 4175| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
|Beets | 215|Macaroni | 1665| 
---------------------------------------------------- 
==========

57. Varied Diet. The human body is a much more varied and complex 
machine than any ever devised by man; personal peculiarities, as well 
as fuel values, influence very largely the diet of an individual. 
Strawberries are excluded from some diets because of a rash which is 
produced on the skin, pork is excluded from other diets for a like 
reason; cauliflower is absolutely indigestible to some and is readily 
digested by others. From practically every diet some foods must be 
excluded, no matter what the fuel value of the substance may be. 

Then, too, there are more uses for food than the production of heat. 
Teeth and bones and nails need a constant supply of mineral matter, 
and mineral matter is frequently found in greatest abundance in foods 
of low fuel value, such as lettuce, watercress, etc., though 
practically all foods yield at least a small mineral constituent. When 
fuel values alone are considered, fruits have a low value, but because 
of the flavor they impart to other foods, and because of the healthful 
influence they exercise in digestion, they cannot be excluded from the 
diet. 

Care should be constantly exercised to provide substantial foods of 
high fuel value. But the nutritive foods should be wisely supplemented 
by such foods as fruits, whose real value is one of indirect rather 
==========
then direct service. 

58. Our Bodies. Somewhat as a house is composed of a group of 
bricks, or a sand heap of grains of sand, the human body is composed 
of small divisions called cells. Ordinarily we cannot see these cells 
because of their minuteness, but if we examine a piece of skin, or a 
hair of the head, or a tiny sliver of bone under the microscope, we 
see that each of these is composed of a group of different cells. A 
merchant, watchful about the fineness of the wool which he is 
purchasing, counts with his lens the number of threads to the inch; a 
physician, when he wishes, can, with the aid of the microscope, 
examine the cells in a muscle, or in a piece of fat, or in a nerve 
fiber. Not only is the human body composed of cells, but so also are 
the bodies of all animals from the tiny gnat which annoys us, and the 
fly which buzzes around us, to the mammoth creatures of the tropics. 
These cells do the work of the body, the bone cells build up the 
skeleton, the nail cells form the finger and toe nails, the lung cells 
take care of breathing, the muscle cells control motion, and the brain 
cells are responsible for thought. 

59. Why we eat so Much. The cells of the body are constantly, day by 
day, minute by minute, breaking down and needing repair, are 
constantly requiring replacement by new cells, and, in the case of the 
child, are continually increasing in number. The repair of an ordinary 
machine, an engine, for example, is made at the expense of money, but 
the repair and replacement of our human cell machinery are 
accomplished at the expense of food. More than one third of all the 
==========
food we eat goes to maintain the body cells, and to keep them in good 
order. It is for this reason that we consume a large quantity of food. 
If all the food we eat were utilized for energy, the housewife could 
cook less, and the housefather could save money on grocer's and 
butcher's bills. If you put a ton of coal in an engine, its available 
energy is used to run the engine, but if the engine were like the 
human body, one third of the ton would be used up by the engine in 
keeping walls, shafts, wheels, belts, etc., in order, and only two 
thirds would go towards running the engine. When an engine is not 
working, fuel is not consumed, but the body requires food for mere 
existence, regardless of whether it does active work or not. When we 
work, the cells break down more quickly, and the repair is greater 
than when we are at rest, and hence there is need of a larger amount 
of food; but whether we work or not, food is necessary. 

60. The Different Foods. The body is very exacting in its demands, 
requiring certain definite foods for the formation and maintenance of 
its cells, and other foods, equally definite, but of different 
character, for heat; our diet therefore must contain foods of high 
fuel value, and likewise foods of cell-forming power. 

Although the foods which we eat are of widely different character, 
such as fruits, vegetables, cereals, oils, meats, eggs, milk, cheese, 
etc., they can be put into three great classes: the carbohydrates, the 
fats, and the proteids. 

61. The Carbohydrates. Corn, wheat, rye, in fact all cereals and 
grains, potatoes, and most vegetables are rich in carbohydrates; as 
are also sugar, molasses, honey, and maple sirup. The foods of the 
==========
first group are valuable because of the starch they contain; for 
example, corn starch, wheat starch, potato starch. The substances of 
the second group are valuable because of the sugar they contain; sugar 
contains the maximum amount of carbohydrate. In the sirups there is a 
considerable quantity of sugar, while in some fruits it is present in 
more or less dilute form. Sweet peaches, apples, grapes, contain a 
moderate amount of sugar; watermelons, pears, etc., contain less. Most 
of our carbohydrates are of plant origin, being found in vegetables, 
fruits, cereals, and sirups. 

Carbohydrates, whether of the starch group or the sugar group, are 
composed chiefly of three elements: carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen; they 
are therefore combustible, and are great energy producers. On the 
other hand, they are worthless for cell growth and repair, and if we 
limited our diet to carbohydrates, we should be like a man who had 
fuel but no engine capable of using it. 

62. The Fats. The best-known fats are butter, lard, olive oil, and 
the fats of meats, cheese, and chocolate. When we test fats for fuel 
values by means of a calorimeter (Fig. 26), we find that they yield 
twice as much heat as the carbohydrates, but that they burn out more 
quickly. Dwellers in cold climates must constantly eat large 
quantities of fatty foods if they are to keep their bodies warm and 
survive the extreme cold. Cod liver oil is an excellent food medicine, 
and if taken in winter serves to warm the body and to protect it 
against the rigors of cold weather. The average person avoids fatty 
foods in summer, knowing from experience that rich foods make him warm 
and uncomfortable. The harder we work and the colder the weather, the 
more food of that kind do we require; it is said that a lumberman 
doing heavy out-of-door work in cold climates needs three times as 
much food as a city clerk. Most of our fats, like lard and butter, are 
==========
of animal origin; some of them, however, like olive oil, peanut 
butter, and coconut oil, are of plant origin. 

[Illustration: FIG. 27.--_a_ is the amount of fat necessary to make 
one calorie; _b_ is the amount of sugar or proteid necessary to make 
one calorie.] 

63. The Proteids. The proteids are the building foods, furnishing 
muscle, bone, skin cells, etc., and supplying blood and other bodily 
fluids. The best-known proteids are white of egg, curd of milk, and 
lean of fish and meat; peas and beans have an abundant supply of this 
substance, and nuts are rich in it. Most of our proteids are of animal 
origin, but some protein material is also found in the vegetable 
world. This class of foods contains carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, and 
in addition, two substances not found in carbohydrates or 
fats--namely, sulphur and nitrogen. Proteids always contain nitrogen, 
and hence they are frequently spoken of as nitrogenous foods. Since 
the proteids contain all the elements found in the two other classes 
of foods, they are able to contribute, if necessary, to the store of 
bodily energy; but their main function is upbuilding, and the diet 
should be chosen so that the proteids do not have a double task. 

For an average man four ounces of dry proteid matter daily will 
suffice to keep the body cells in normal condition. 

It has been estimated that 300,000,000 blood cells alone need daily 
repair or renewal. When we consider that the blood is but one part of 
the body, and that all organs and fluids have corresponding 
requirements, we realize how vast is the work to be done by the food 
which we eat. 

64. Mistakes in Buying. The body demands a daily ration of the three 
classes of food stuffs, but it is for us to determine from what 
meats, vegetables, fruits, cereals, etc., this supply shall be 
obtained (Figs. 28 and 29). 

==========
[Illustration: FIG. 28.--Table of food values.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 29.--Diagram showing the difference in the cost of 
three foods which give about the same amount of nutrition each.] 

Generally speaking, meats are the most expensive foods we can 
purchase, and hence should be bought seldom and in small quantities. 
Their place can be taken by beans, peas, potatoes, etc., and at less 
than a quarter of the cost. The average American family eats meat 
three times a day, while the average family of the more conservative 
and older countries rarely eats meat more than once a day. The 
following tables indicate the financial loss arising from an unwise 
selection of foods:-- 

FOOD CONSUMED--ONE WEEK 
|===========================|=======================================| 
| FAMILY No. 1 | || FAMILY No. 2 | 
|---------------------------|---------------------------------------| 
|20 loaves of bread | $1.00 ||15 lb. flour, bread | 
|10 to 12 lb. loin steak | || home made (skim milk used) | $.45 
| or meat of similar cost | 2.00 ||Yeast, shortening, and | 
|20 to 25 lb. rib roast | || skim milk | .10 
| or similar meat | 4.40 ||10 lb. steak (round, Hamburger| 
|4 lb. high-priced cereal | || and some loin) | 1.50 
| breakfast food, 20? | .80 ||10 lb. other meats, boiling | 
|Cake and pastry purchased | 3.00 || pieces, rump roast, etc. | 1.00 
|8 lb. butter, 30? | 2.40 || 5 lb. cheese, 16? | .80 
|Tea, coffee, spices, etc. | .75 || 5 lb. oatmeal (bulk) | .15 
|Mushrooms | .75 || 5 lb. beans | .25 
|Celery | 1.00 ||Home-made cake and pastry | 1.00 
|Oranges | 2.00 || 6 lb. butter, 30? | 1.80 
==========
|Potatoes | .25 || 3 lb. home-made shortening | .25 
|Miscellaneous canned goods | 2.00 ||Tea, coffee, and spices | .40 
|Milk | .50 ||Apples | .50 
|Miscellaneous foods | 2.00 ||Prunes | .25 
|3 doz. eggs | .60 ||Potatoes | .25 
| |-------||Milk | 1.00 
| |$23.45 ||Miscellaneous foods | 1.00 
| | || 3 doz. eggs | .60 
| | || -|----- 
| | || $|11.30 
| -----------------------|-----------------------------------------|--- 
| -----------------------|-----------------------------------------|--- 

"The tables show that one family spends over twice as much in the 
purchase of foods as the other family, and yet the one whose food 
costs the less actually secures the larger amount of nutritive 
material and is better fed than the family where more money is 
expended."--From _Human Foods_, Snyder. 

The Source of the Different Foods. All of our food comes from either 
the plant world or the animal world. Broadly speaking, plants furnish 
the carbohydrates, that is, starch and sugar; animals furnish the fats 
and proteids. But although vegetable foods yield carbohydrates mainly, 
some of them, like beans and peas, contain large quantities of protein 
and can be substituted for meat without disadvantage to the body. 
Other plant products, such as nuts, have fat as their most abundant 
food constituent. The peanut, for example, contains 43% of fat, 30% of 
proteids, and only 17% of carbohydrates; the Brazil nut has 65% of 
fat, 17% of proteids, and only 9% of carbohydrates. Nuts make a good 
meat substitute, and since they contain a fair amount of carbohydrates 
besides the fats and proteins, they supply all of the essential food 
==========
constituents and form a well-balanced food. 




CHAPTER VI 

WATER 


==========
65. Destructive Action of Water. The action of water in stream and 
sea, in springs and wells, is evident to all; but the activity of 
ground water--that is, rain water which sinks into the soil and 
remains there--is little known in general. The real activity of ground 
water is due to its great solvent power; every time we put sugar into 
tea or soap into water we are using water as a solvent. When rain 
falls, it dissolves substances floating in the atmosphere, and when it 
sinks into the ground and becomes ground water, it dissolves material 
out of the rock which it encounters (Fig. 30). We know that water 
contains some mineral matter, because kettles in which water is boiled 
acquire in a short time a crust or coating on the inside. This crust 
is due to the accumulation in the kettle of mineral matter which was 
in solution in the water, but which was left behind when the water 
evaporated. (See Section 25.) 

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--Showing how caves and holes are formed by the 
solvent action of water.] 

The amount of dissolved mineral matter present in some wells and 
springs is surprisingly great; the famous springs of Bath, England, 
contain so much mineral matter in solution, that a column 9 feet in 
diameter and 140 feet high could be built out of the mineral matter 
contained in the water consumed yearly by the townspeople. 

[Illustration: FIG. 31.--The work of water as a solvent.] 

Rocks and minerals are not all equally soluble in water; some are so 
little soluble that it is years before any change becomes apparent, 
and the substances are said to be insoluble, yet in reality they are 
slowly dissolving. Other rocks, like limestone, are so readily soluble 
in water that from the small pores and cavities eaten out by the 
water, there may develop in long centuries, caves and caverns (Fig. 
30). Most rock, like granite, contains several substances, some of 
which are readily soluble and others of which are not readily soluble; 
in such rocks a peculiar appearance is presented, due to the rapid 
disappearance of the soluble substance, and the persistence of the 
more resistant substance (Fig. 31). 

We see that the solvent power of water is constantly causing changes, 
dissolving some mineral substances, and leaving others practically 
untouched; eating out crevices of various shapes and sizes, and by 
gradual solution through unnumbered years enlarging these crevices 
into wonderful caves, such as the Mammoth Cave of Kentucky. 

66. Constructive Action of Water. Water does not always act as a 
destructive agent; what it breaks down in one place it builds up in 
another. It does this by means of precipitation. Water dissolves salt, 
and also dissolves lead nitrate, but if a salt solution is mixed with 
a lead nitrate solution, a solid white substance is formed in the 
water (Fig. 32). This formation of a solid substance from the mingling 
of two liquids is called precipitation; such a process occurs daily in 
the rocks beneath the surface of the earth. (See Laboratory Manual.) 

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--From the mingling of two liquids a solid is 
sometimes formed.] 

Suppose water from different sources enters a crack in a rock, 
bringing different substances in solution; then the mingling of the 
waters may cause precipitation, and the solid thus formed will be 
deposited in the crack and fill it up. Hence, while ground water tends 
to make rock porous and weak by dissolving out of it large quantities 
of mineral matter, it also tends under other conditions to make it 
==========
more compact because it deposits in cracks, crevices, and pores the 
mineral matter precipitated from solution. 

These two forces are constantly at work; in some places the 
destructive action is more prominent, in other places the constructive 
action; but always the result is to change the character of the 
original substance. When the mineral matter precipitated from the 
solutions is deposited in cracks, _veins_ are formed (Fig. 33), which 
may consist of the ore of different metals, such as gold, silver, 
copper, lead, etc. Man is almost entirely dependent upon these veins 
for the supply of metal needed in the various industries, because in 
the original condition of the rocks, the metallic substances are so 
scattered that they cannot be profitably extracted. 

[Illustration: FIG. 33.--Mineral matter precipitated from solution is 
deposited in crevices and forms veins.] 

Naturally, the veins themselves are not composed of one substance 
alone, because several different precipitates may be formed. But there 
is a decided grouping of valuable metals, and these can then be 
readily separated by means of electricity. 

67. Streams. Streams usually carry mud and sand along with them; 
this is particularly well seen after a storm when rivers and brooks 
are muddy. The puddles which collect at the foot of a hill after a 
storm are muddy because of the particles of soil gathered by the water 
as it runs down the hill. The particles are not dissolved in the 
water, but are held there in suspension, as we call it technically. 
The river made muddy after a storm by suspended particles usually 
becomes clear and transparent after it has traveled onward for miles, 
because, as it travels, the particles drop to the bottom and are 
deposited there. Hence, materials suspended in the water are borne 
along and deposited at various places (Fig. 34). The amount of 
deposition by large rivers is so great that in some places channels 
fill up and must be dredged annually, and vessels are sometimes caught 
in the deposit and have to be towed away. 

Running water in the form of streams and rivers, by carrying sand 
particles, stones, and rocks from high slopes and depositing them at 
lower levels, wears away land at one place and builds it up at 
another, and never ceases in its work of changing the nature of the 
earth's surface (Fig. 35). 

[Illustration: FIG. 34.--Deposit left by running water.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 35.--Water by its action constantly changes the 
character of the land.] 

==========
68. Relation of Water to Human Life. Water is one of the most 
essential of food materials, and whether we drink much or little 
water, we nevertheless get a great deal of it. The larger part of many 
of our foods is composed of water; more than half of the weight of the 
meat we eat is made up of water; and vegetables are often more than 
nine tenths water. (See Laboratory Manual.) Asparagus and tomatoes 
have over 90 per cent. of water, and most fruits are more than three 
fourths water; even bread, which contains as little water as any of 
our common foods, is about one third water (Fig. 36). 

[Illustration: FIG. 36.--Diagram of the composition of a loaf of bread 
and of a potato: 1. ash; 2, food; 3, water.] 

Without water, solid food material, although present in the body, 
would not be in a condition suitable for bodily use. An abundant 
supply of water enables the food to be dissolved or suspended in it, 
and in solution the food material is easily distributed to all parts 
of the body. 

Further, water assists in the removal of the daily bodily wastes, and 
thus rids the system of foul and poisonous substances. 

The human body itself consists largely of water; indeed, about two 
thirds of our own weight is water. The constant replenishing of this 
large quantity is necessary to life, and a considerable amount of the 
necessary supply is furnished by foods, particularly the fruits and 
vegetables. 

But while the supply furnished by the daily food is considerable, it 
is by no means sufficient, and should be supplemented by good drinking 
water. 

==========
69. Water and its Dangers. Our drinking water comes from far and 
near, and as it moves from place to place, it carries with it in 
solution or suspension anything which it can find, whether it be 
animal, vegetable, or mineral matter. The power of water to gather up 
matter is so great that the average drinking water contains 20 to 90 
grains of solid matter per gallon; that is, if a gallon of ordinary 
drinking water is left to evaporate, a residue of 20 to 90 grains will 
be left. (See Laboratory Manual.) As water runs down a hill slope 
(Fig. 37), it carries with it the filth gathered from acres of land; 
carries with it the refuse of stable, barn, and kitchen; and too often 
this impure surface water joins the streams which supply our cities. 
Lakes and rivers which furnish drinking water should be carefully 
protected from surface draining; that is, from water which has flowed 
over the land and has thus accumulated the waste of pasture and 
stable and, it may be, of dumping ground. 

[Illustration: FIG. 37.--As water flows over the land, it gathers 
filth and disease germs.] 

It is not necessary that water should be absolutely free from all 
foreign substances in order to be safe for daily use in drinking; a 
limited amount of mineral matter is not injurious and may sometimes be 
really beneficial. It is the presence of animal and vegetable matter 
that causes real danger, and it is known that typhoid fever is due 
largely to such impurities present in the drinking water. 

70. Methods of Purification. Water is improved by any of the 
following methods:-- 

(_a_) _Boiling_. The heat of boiling destroys animal and vegetable 
germs. Hence water that has been boiled a few minutes is safe to use. 
This is the most practical method of purification in the home, and is 
very efficient. The boiled water should be kept in clean, corked 
bottles; otherwise foreign substances from the atmosphere re?nter the 
water, and the advantage gained from boiling is lost. 

(_b_) _Distillation_. By this method pure water is obtained, but this 
method of purification cannot be used conveniently in the home 
(Section 25). 

(_c_) _Filtration_. In filtration, the water is forced through 
porcelain or other porous substances which allow the passage of water, 
but which hold back the minute foreign particles suspended in the 
water. (See Laboratory Manual.) The filters used in ordinary dwellings 
are of stone, asbestos, or charcoal. They are often valueless, because 
they soon become choked and cannot be properly cleaned. 

The filtration plants owned and operated by large cities are usually 
safe; there is careful supervision of the filters, and frequent and 
effective cleanings are made. In many cities the filtration system is 
so good that private care of the water supply is unnecessary. 

71. The Source of Water. In the beginning, the earth was stored with 
water just as it was with metal, rock, etc. Some of the water 
gradually took the form of rivers, lakes, streams, and wells, as now, 
and it is this original supply of water which furnishes us all that we 
have to-day. We quarry to obtain stone and marble for building, and we 
fashion the earth's treasures into forms of our own, but we cannot 
create these things. We bore into the ground and drill wells in order 
to obtain water from hidden sources; we utilize rapidly flowing 
streams to drive the wheels of commerce, but the total amount of water 
remains practically unchanged. 

The water which flows on the earth is constantly changing its form; 
the heat of the sun causes it to evaporate, or to become vapor, and to 
mingle with the atmosphere. In time, the vapor cools, condenses, and 
falls as snow or rain; the water which is thus returned to the earth 
feeds our rivers, lakes, springs, and wells, and these in turn supply 
water to man. When water falls upon a field, it soaks into the ground, 
==========
or collects in puddles which slowly evaporate, or it runs off and 
drains into small streams or into rivers. That which soaks into the 
ground is the most valuable because it remains on the earth longest 
and is the purest. 

[Illustration: FIG. 38.--How springs are formed. _A_, porous layer; 
_B_, non-porous layer; _C_, spring.] 

Water which soaks into the ground moves slowly downward and after a 
longer or shorter journey, meets with a non-porous layer of rock 
through which it cannot pass, and which effectually hinders its 
downward passage. In such regions, there is an accumulation of water, 
and a well dug there would have an abundant supply of water. The 
non-porous layer is rarely level, and hence the water whose vertical 
path is obstructed does not "back up" on the soil, but flows down hill 
parallel with the obstructing non-porous layer, and in some distant 
region makes an outlet for itself, forming a spring (Fig. 38). The 
streams originating in the springs flow through the land and 
eventually join larger streams or rivers; from the surface of streams 
and rivers evaporation occurs, the water once more becomes vapor and 
passes into the atmosphere, where it is condensed and again falls to 
the earth. 

Water which has filtered through many feet of earth is far purer and 
safer than that which fell directly into the rivers, or which ran off 
from the land and joined the surface streams without passing through 
the soil. 

72. The Composition of Water. Water was long thought to be a simple 
==========
substance, but toward the end of the eighteenth century it was found 
to consist of two quite different substances, oxygen (O) and hydrogen 
(H.) 

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--The decomposition of water.] 

If we send an electric current through water (acidulated to make it a 
good conductor), as shown in Figure 39, we see bubbles of gas rising 
from the end of the wire by which the current enters the water, and 
other bubbles of gas rising from the end of the wire by which the 
current leaves the water. These gases have evidently come from the 
water and are the substances of which it is composed, because the 
water begins to disappear as the gases are formed. If we place over 
each end of the wire an inverted jar filled with water, the gases are 
easily collected. The first thing we notice is that there is always 
twice as much of one gas as of the other; that is, water is composed 
of two substances, one of which is always present in twice as large 
quantities as the other. 

73. The Composition of Water. On testing the gases into which water 
is broken up by an electric current, we find them to be quite 
different. One proves to be oxygen, a substance with which we are 
already familiar. The other gas, hydrogen, is new to us and is 
interesting as being the lightest known substance, being even "lighter 
than a feather." 

An important fact about hydrogen is that in burning it gives as much 
heat as five times its weight of coal. Its flame is blue and almost 
invisible by daylight, but intensely hot. If fine platinum wire is 
placed in an ordinary gas flame, it does not melt, but if placed in a 
flame of burning hydrogen, it melts very quickly. 

74. How to prepare Hydrogen. There are many different methods of 
preparing hydrogen, but the easiest laboratory method is to pour 
sulphuric acid, or hydrochloric acid, on zinc shavings and to collect 
in a bottle the gas which is given off. This gas proves to be 
colorless, tasteless, and odorless. (See Laboratory Manual.) 
==========




CHAPTER VII 

AIR 


75. The Instability of the Air. We are usually not conscious of the 
air around us, but sometimes we realize that the air is heavy, while 
at other times we feel the bracing effect of the atmosphere. We live 
in an ocean of air as truly as fish inhabit an ocean of water. If you 
have ever been at the seashore you know that the ocean is never still 
for a second; sometimes the waves surge back and forth in angry fury, 
at other times the waves glide gently in to the shore and the surface 
is as smooth as glass; but we know that there is perpetual motion of 
the water even when the ocean is in its gentlest moods. Generally our 
atmosphere is quiet, and we are utterly unconscious of it; at other 
times we are painfully aware of it, because of its furious winds. Then 
again we are oppressed by it because of the vast quantity of vapor 
which it holds in the form of fog, or mist. The atmosphere around us 
is as restless and varying as is the water of the sea. The air at the 
top of a high tower is very different from the air at the base of the 
tower. Not only does the atmosphere vary greatly at different 
altitudes, but it varies at the same place from time to time, at one 
period being heavy and raw, at another being fresh and invigorating. 

Winds, temperature, and humidity all have a share in determining 
atmospheric conditions, and no one of these plays a small part. 

76. The Character of the Air. The atmosphere which envelops us at 
all times extends more than fifty miles above us, its height being far 
greater than the greatest depths of the sea. This atmosphere varies 
from place to place; at the sea level it is heavy, on the mountain top 
less heavy, and far above the earth it is so light that it does not 
contain enough oxygen to permit man to live. Figure 40 illustrates by 
==========
a pile of pillows how the pressure of the air varies from level to 
level. 

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--To illustrate the decrease in pressure with 
height.] 

Sea level is a low portion of the earth's surface, hence at sea level 
there is a high column of air, and a heavy air pressure. As one passes 
from sea level to mountain top a gradual but steady decrease in the 
height of the air column occurs, and hence a gradual but definite 
lessening of the air pressure. 

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--The water in the tube is at the same level as 
that in the glass.] 

77. Air Pressure. If an empty tube (Fig. 41) is placed upright in 
water, the water will not rise in the tube, but if the tube is put in 
water and the air is then drawn out of the tube by the mouth, the 
water will rise in the tube (Fig. 42). This is what happens when we 
take lemonade through a straw. When the air is withdrawn from the 
straw by the mouth, the pressure within the straw is reduced, and the 
liquid is forced up the straw by the air pressure on the surface of 
the liquid in the glass. Even the ancient Greeks and Romans knew that 
water would rise in a tube when the pressure within the tube was 
reduced, and hence they tried to obtain water from wells in this 
fashion, but the water could never be raised higher than 34 feet. Let 
us see why water could rise 34 feet and no more. If an empty pipe is 
placed in a cistern of water, the water in the pipe does not rise 
above the level of the water in the cistern. If, however, the pressure 
in the tube is removed, the water in the tube will rise to a height of 
34 feet approximately. If now the air pressure in the tube is 
restored, the water in the tube sinks again to the level of that in 
the cistern. The air pressing on the liquid in the cistern tends to 
push some liquid up the tube, but the air pressing on the water in the 
tube pushes downwards, and tends to keep the liquid from rising, and 
these two pressures balance each other. When, however, the pressure 
within the tube is reduced, the liquid rises because of the unbalanced 
pressure which acts on the water in the cistern. 

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--Water rises in the tube when the air is 
withdrawn.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 43.--The air supports a column of mercury 30 
inches high.] 

The column of water which can be raised this way is approximately 34 
feet, sometimes a trifle more, sometimes a trifle less. If water were 
twice as heavy, just half as high a column could be supported by the 
atmosphere. Mercury is about thirteen times as heavy as water and, 
therefore, the column of mercury supported by the atmosphere is about 
one thirteenth as high as the column of water supported by the 
atmosphere. This can easily be demonstrated. Fill a glass tube about a 
yard long with mercury, close the open end with a finger, and quickly 
insert the end of the inverted tube in a dish of mercury (Fig. 43). 
When the finger is removed, the mercury falls somewhat, leaving an 
empty space in the top of the tube. If we measure the column in the 
tube, we find its height is about one thirteenth of 34 feet or 30 
inches, exactly what we should expect. Since there is no air pressure 
within the tube, the atmospheric pressure on the mercury in the dish 
is balanced solely by the mercury within the tube, that is, by a 
column of mercury 30 inches high. The shortness of the mercury column 
as compared with that of water makes the mercury more convenient for 
both experimental and practical purposes. (See Laboratory Manual.) 

78. The Barometer. Since the pressure of the air changes from time 
to time, the height of the mercury will change from day to day, and 
hour to hour. When the air pressure is heavy, the mercury will tend to 
be high; when the air pressure is low, the mercury will show a shorter 
column; and by reading the level of the mercury one can learn the 
pressure of the atmosphere. If a glass tube and dish of mercury are 
attached to a board and the dish of mercury is inclosed in a case for 
protection from moisture and dirt, and further if a scale of inches or 
centimeters is made on the upper portion of the board, we have a 
mercurial barometer (Fig. 44). 

[Illustration: FIG. 44.--A simple barometer.] 

If the barometer is taken to the mountain top, the column of mercury 
falls gradually during the ascent, showing that as one ascends, the 
pressure decreases in agreement with the statement in Section 76. 
Observations similar to these were made by Torricelli as early as the 
sixteenth century. Taking a barometric reading consists in measuring 
the height of the mercury column. 

79. A Portable Barometer. The mercury barometer is large and 
==========
inconvenient to carry from place to place, and a more portable form 
has been devised, known as the aneroid barometer (Fig. 45). This form 
of barometer is extremely sensitive; indeed, it is so delicate that 
it shows the slight difference between the pressure at the table top 
and the pressure at the floor level, whereas the mercury barometer 
would indicate only a much greater variation in atmospheric pressure. 
The aneroid barometers are frequently made no larger than a watch and 
can be carried conveniently in the pocket, but they get out of order 
easily and must be frequently readjusted. The aneroid barometer is an 
air-tight box whose top is made of a thin metallic disk which bends 
inward or outward according to the pressure of the atmosphere. If the 
atmospheric pressure increases, the thin disk is pushed slightly 
inward; if, on the other hand, the atmospheric pressure decreases, the 
pressure on the metallic disk decreases and the disk is not pressed so 
far inward. The motion of the disk is small, and it would be 
impossible to calculate changes in atmospheric pressure from the 
motion of the disk, without some mechanical device to make the slight 
changes in motion perceptible. 

[Illustration: FIG. 45.--Aneroid barometer.] 

In order to magnify the slight changes in the position of the disk, 
the thin face is connected with a system of levers, or wheels, which 
multiplies the changes in motion and communicates them to a pointer 
which moves around a graduated circular face. In Figure 45 the real 
barometer is scarcely visible, being securely inclosed in a metal case 
for protection; the principle, however, can be understood by reference 
to Figure 46. 

[Illustration: FIG. 46.--Principle of the aneroid barometer.] 

80. The Weight of the Air. We have seen that the pressure of the 
atmosphere at any point is due to the weight of the air column which 
stretches from that point far up into the sky above. This weight 
varies slightly from time to time and from place to place, but it is 
equal to about 15 pounds to the square inch as shown by actual 
measurement. It comes to us as a surprise sometimes that air actually 
has weight; for example, a mass of 12 cubic feet of air at average 
pressure weighs 1 pound, and the air in a large assembly hall weighs 
more than 1 ton. 

We are practically never conscious of this really enormous pressure of 
the atmosphere, which is exerted over every inch of our bodies, 
because the pressure is exerted equally over the outside and the 
inside of our bodies; the cells and tissues of our bodies containing 
gases under atmospheric pressure. If, however, the finger is placed 
over the open end of a tube and the air is sucked out of the tube by 
the mouth, the flesh of the finger bulges into the tube because the 
pressure within the finger is no longer equalized by the usual 
atmospheric pressure (Fig. 47). 

[Illustration: FIG. 47.--The flesh bulges out.] 

A?ronauts have never ascended much higher than 7 miles; at that height 
the barometer stands at 7 inches instead of at 30 inches, and the 
internal pressure in cells and tissues is not balanced by an equal 
external pressure. The unequalized internal pressure forces the blood 
to the surface of the body and causes rupture of blood vessels and 
other physical difficulties. 

81. Use of the Barometer. Changes in air pressure are very closely 
connected with changes in the weather. The barometer does not directly 
==========
foretell the weather, but a low or falling pressure, accompanied by a 
simultaneous fall of the mercury, usually precedes foul weather, while 
a rising pressure, accompanied by a simultaneous rise in the mercury, 
usually precedes fair weather. The barometer is not an infallible 
prophet, but it is of great assistance in predicting the general trend 
of the weather. There are certain changes in the barometer which 
follow no known laws, and which allow of no safe predictions, but on 
the other hand, general future conditions for a few days ahead can be 
fairly accurately determined. Figure 48 shows a barograph or 
self-registering barometer which automatically registers air pressure. 

[Illustration: FIG. 48.--Barograph.] 

Seaport towns in particular, but all cities, large or small, and 
villages too, are on request notified by the United States Weather 
Bureau ten hours or more in advance, of probable weather conditions, 
and in this way precautions are taken which annually save millions of 
dollars and hundreds of lives. 

I recollect a summer spent on a New Hampshire farm, and know that an 
old farmer started his farm hands haying by moonlight at two o'clock 
in the morning, because the Special Farmer's Weather Forecast of the 
preceding evening had predicted rain for the following day. His 
reliance on the weather report was not misplaced, since the storm came 
with full force at noon. Sailing vessels, yachts, and fishing dories 
remain within reach of port if the barometer foretells storms. 

[Illustration: FIG. 49.--Isotherms.] 

==========
82. Isobaric and Isothermal Lines. If a line were drawn through all 
points on the surface of the earth having an equal barometric pressure 
at the same time, such a line would be called an isobar. For example, 
if the height of barometers in different localities is observed at 
exactly the same time, and if all the cities and towns which have the 
same pressure are connected by a line, the curved lines will be called 
isobars. By the aid of these lines the barometric conditions over a 
large area can be studied. The Weather Bureau at Washington relies 
greatly on these isobars for statements concerning local and distant 
weather forecasts, any shift in isobaric lines showing change in 
atmospheric pressure. 

If a line is drawn through all points on the surface of the earth 
having the same _temperature_ at the same instant, such a line is 
called an isotherm (Fig. 49). 

83. Weather Maps. Scattered over the United States are about 125 
Government Weather Stations, at each of which three times a day, at 
the same instant, accurate observations of the weather are made. These 
observations, which consist of the reading of barometer and 
thermometer, the determination of the velocity and direction of the 
wind, the determination of the humidity and of the amount of rain or 
snow, are telegraphed to the chief weather official at Washington. 
From the reports of wind storms, excessive rainfall, hot waves, 
clearing weather, etc., and their rate of travel, the chief officials 
predict where the storms, etc., will be at a definite future time. In 
the United States, the _general_ movement of weather conditions, as 
indicated by the barometer, is from west to east, and if a certain 
weather condition prevails in the west, it is probable that it will 
advance eastward, although with decided modifications. So many 
influences modify atmospheric conditions that unfailing predictions 
are impossible, but the Weather Bureau predictions prove true in about 
eight cases out of ten. 

The reports made out at Washington are telegraphed on request to 
cities in this country, and are frequently published in the daily 
papers, along with the forecast of the local office. A careful study 
of these reports enables one to forecast to some extent the probable 
weather conditions of the day. 

The first impression of a weather map (Fig. 50) with its various lines 
and signals is apt to be one of confusion, and the temptation comes to 
abandon the task of finding an underlying plan of the weather. If one 
will bear in mind a few simple rules, the complexity of the weather 
map will disappear and a glance at the map will give one information 
concerning general weather conditions just as a glance at the 
thermometer in the morning will give some indication of the probable 
temperature of the day. (See Laboratory Manual.) 

[Illustration: FIG. 50. weather Map] 

On the weather map solid lines represent isobars and dotted lines 
represent isotherms. The direction of the wind at any point is 
==========
indicated by an arrow which flies with the wind; and the state of the 
weather--clear, partly cloudy, cloudy, rain, snow, etc.--is indicated 
by symbols. 

84. Components of the Air. The best known constituent of the air is 
oxygen, already familiar to us as the feeder of the fire without and 
within the body. Almost one fifth of the air which envelops us is made 
up of the life-giving oxygen. This supply of oxygen in the air is 
constantly being used up by breathing animals and glowing fires, and 
unless there were some constant source of additional supply, the 
quantity of oxygen in the air would soon become insufficient to 
support animal life. The unfailing constant source of atmospheric 
oxygen is plant life (Section 48). The leaves of plants absorb carbon 
dioxide from the air, and break it up into oxygen and carbon. The 
plant makes use of the carbon but it rejects the oxygen, which passes 
back into the atmosphere through the pores of the leaves. 

Although oxygen constitutes only one fifth of the atmosphere, it is 
one of the most abundant and widely scattered of all substances. 
Almost the whole earth, whether it be rich loam, barren clay, or 
granite boulder, contains oxygen in some form or other; that is, in 
combination with other substances. But nowhere, except in the air 
around us, do we find oxygen free and uncombined with other 
substances. 

A less familiar but more abundant constituent of the atmosphere is the 
nitrogen. Almost four fifths of the air around us is made up of 
nitrogen. If the atmosphere were composed of oxygen alone, the merest 
flicker of a match would set the whole world ablaze. The fact that the 
oxygen of the air is diluted as it were with so large a proportion of 
nitrogen, prevents fires from sweeping over the world and destroying 
everything in their path. Nitrogen does not support combustion, and a 
burning match placed in a corked bottle goes out as soon as it has 
used up the oxygen in the bottle. The nitrogen in the bottle, not only 
does not assist the burning of the match, but it acts as a damper to 
the burning. 

Free nitrogen, like oxygen, is a colorless, odorless gas. It is not 
poisonous; but one would die if surrounded by nitrogen alone, just as 
one would die if surrounded by water. The vast supply of nitrogen in 
the atmosphere would be useless if the smaller amount of oxygen were 
not present to keep the body alive. Nitrogen is so important a factor 
==========
in daily life that an entire chapter will be devoted to it later. 

Another constituent of the air with which we are familiar is carbon 
dioxide. In pure air, carbon dioxide is present in very small 
proportion, being continually taken from the air by plants in the 
manufacture of their food. 

Various other substances are present in the air in very minute 
proportions, but of all the substances in the air, oxygen, nitrogen, 
and carbon dioxide are the most important. 




CHAPTER VIII 

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF GASES 


85. Bicycle Tires. We know very well that we cannot put more than a 
certain amount of water in a tube, but we know equally well that the 
amount of air which can be pumped into a bicycle or automobile tire 
depends largely upon our muscular energy. A gallon of water remains a 
gallon of water and requires a perfectly definite amount of space, but 
air can be compressed and compressed, and made to occupy less and less 
space. While it is true that air is easily compressed, it is also true 
that air is elastic and capable of very rapid and easy expansion. If a 
puncture occurs in a tire, the compressed air escapes very quickly; 
that is, the compressed air within the tube has taken the first 
opportunity offered for expansion. 

[Illustration: FIG. 51.--By squeezing the bulb, air is forced out of 
the nozzle.] 

The fact that air is elastic has added materially to the comfort of 
the world. Transportation by bicycles and automobiles has been greatly 
facilitated by the use of air tires. In many hospitals, air mattresses 
are used in place of hair, feather, or cotton mattresses, and in this 
way the bed is kept fresher and cleaner, and can be moved with less 
danger of discomfort to the patient. Every time we squeeze the bulb of 
an atomizer, we force compressed or condensed air through the 
atomizer, and the condensed air pushes the liquid out of the nozzle 
(Fig. 51). Thus we see that in the necessities and conveniences of 
life compressed air plays an important part. 

86. The Danger of Compression. Air under ordinary atmospheric 
==========
conditions exerts a pressure of 15 pounds to the square inch. If, now, 
large quantities of air are compressed into a small space, the 
pressure exerted becomes correspondingly greater. If too much air is 
blown into a toy balloon, the balloon bursts because it cannot support 
the great pressure exerted by the compressed air within. What is true 
of air is true of all gases. Dangerous boiler explosions have occurred 
because the boiler walls were not strong enough to withstand the 
pressure of the steam (which is water in the form of gas). The 
pressure within the boilers of engines is frequently several hundred 
pounds to the square inch, and such a pressure needs a strong boiler. 

87. How Pressure is Measured in Buildings. In the preceding Section 
we saw that undue pressure of a gas may cause explosion. It is 
important, therefore, that authorities keep strict watch on gases 
confined within pipes and reservoirs, never allowing the pressure to 
exceed that which the walls of the reservoir will safely bear. 

[Illustration: FIG. 52.--A pressure gauge.] 

Pressure in a gas pipe may be measured by a simple instrument called 
the pressure gauge: The gauge consists of a bent glass tube containing 
mercury, and so made that one end can be fitted to a gas jet (Fig. 
52). When the gas cock is closed, the mercury stands at the same level 
in both arms, but when the cock is opened, the gas whose pressure is 
being measured forces the mercury up the opposite arm. If the pressure 
of the gas is small, the mercury changes its level but very little. It 
is clear that the height of a column of mercury is a measure of the 
gas pressure. Now it is known that one cubic inch of mercury weighs 
about half a pound. Hence a column of mercury one inch high indicates 
a pressure of about one half pound to the square inch; a column two 
inches high indicates a pressure of about one pound to the square 
inch, and so on. 

This is a very convenient way to measure the pressure of the 
illuminating gas in our homes and offices. The gauge is attached to 
the gas burner and the pressure is read by means of a scale attached 
to the gauge. (See Laboratory Manual.) 

In order to have satisfactory illumination, the pressure must be 
strong enough to give a steady, broad flame. If the flame from any gas 
jet is flickering and weak, it is usually an indication of 
insufficient pressure and the gas company should investigate 
conditions and see to it that the consumer receives his proper value. 

87. The Gas Meter. Most householders are deeply interested in the 
actual amount of gas which they consume (gas is charged for according 
to the number of cubic feet used), and therefore they should be able 
to read the gas meter which indicates their consumption of gas. Such 
gas meters are furnished by the companies, and can be read easily. 

[Illustration: FIG. 53.--The gas meter indicates the number of cubic 
feet of gas consumed.] 

The instrument itself is somewhat complex. It will suffice to say that 
within the meter box are thin disks which are moved by the stream of 
gas that passes them. This movement of the disks is recorded by 
clockwork devices on a dial face. In this way, the number of cubic 
feet of gas which pass through the meter is automatically registered. 

89. The Relation between Pressure and Volume. It was long known that 
as the pressure of a gas increases, that is, as it becomes compressed, 
its volume decreases, but Robert Boyle was the first to determine the 
exact relation between the volume and the pressure of a gas. He did 
this in a very simple manner. 

Pour mercury into a U-shaped tube until the level of the mercury in 
the closed end of the tube is the same as the level in the open end. 
The air in the long arm is pressing upon the mercury in that arm, and 
is tending to force it up the short arm. The air in the short closed 
arm is pressing down upon the mercury in that arm and tending to send 
it up the long arm. Since the mercury is at the same level in the two 
arms, the pressure in the long arm must be equal to the pressure in 
the short arm. But the long arm is open, and the pressure in that arm 
is the pressure of the atmosphere. Therefore the pressure in the short 
arm must be one atmosphere. Measure the distance _bc_ between the top 
of the mercury and the closed end of the tube. 

[Illustration: FIGS. 54, 55.--As the pressure on the gas increases, 
its volume decreases.] 

Pour more mercury into the open end of the tube, and as the mercury 
rises higher and higher in the long arm, note carefully the decrease 
in the volume of the air in the short arm. Pour mercury into the tube 
until the difference in level _bd_ is just equal to the barometric 
height, approximately 32 inches. The pressure of the air in the closed 
end now supports the pressure of one atmosphere, and in addition, a 
column of mercury equal to another atmosphere. If now the air column 
in the closed end is measured, its volume will be only one half of its 
former volume. By doubling the pressure we have reduced the volume one 
half. Similarly, if the pressure is increased threefold, the volume 
will be reduced to one third of the original volume. 

90. Heat due to Compression. We saw in Section 89 that whenever the 
pressure exerted upon a gas is increased, the volume of the gas is 
decreased; and that whenever the pressure upon a gas is decreased, the 
volume of the gas is increased. If the pressure is changed very 
==========
slowly, the change in the temperature of the gas is imperceptible; if, 
however, the pressure is removed suddenly, the temperature falls 
rapidly, or if the pressure is applied suddenly, the temperature rises 
rapidly. When bicycle tires are being inflated, the pump becomes hot 
because of the compression of the air. 

The amount of heat resulting from compression is surprisingly large; 
for example, if a mass of gas at 0? C. is suddenly compressed to one 
half its original volume, its temperature rises 87? C. 

91. Cooling by Expansion. If a gas expands suddenly, its temperature 
falls; for example, if a mass of gas at 87? C. is allowed to expand 
rapidly to twice its original volume, its temperature falls to 0? C. 
If the compressed air of a bicycle tire is allowed to expand and a 
sensitive thermometer is held in the path of the escaping air, the 
thermometer will show a decided drop in temperature. 

The low temperature obtained by the expansion of air or other gases is 
utilized commercially on a large scale. By means of powerful pistons 
air is compressed to one third or one fourth its original volume, is 
passed through a coil of pipe surrounded with cold water, and is then 
allowed to escape into large refrigerating vaults, which thereby have 
their temperatures noticeably lowered, and can be used for the 
permanent storage of meats, fruits, and other perishable material. In 
summer, when the atmospheric temperature is high, the storage and 
preservation of foods is of vital importance to factories and cold 
storage houses, and but for the low temperature obtainable by the 
expansion of compressed gases, much of our food supply would be lost 
to use. 

92. Unexpected Transformations. If the pressure on a gas is greatly 
increased, a sudden transformation sometimes occurs and the gas 
becomes a liquid. Then, if the pressure is reduced, a second 
transformation occurs, and the liquid evaporates or returns to its 
original form as a gas. 

In Section 23 we saw that a fall of temperature caused water vapor to 
condense or liquefy. If temperature alone were considered, most gases 
could not be liquefied, because the temperature at which the average 
gas liquefies is so low as to be out of the range of possibility; it 
has been calculated, for example, that a temperature of 252? C. below 
zero would have to be obtained in order to liquefy hydrogen. 

Some gases can be easily transformed into liquids by pressure alone, 
some gases can be easily transformed into liquids by cooling alone; on 
the other hand, many gases are so difficult to liquefy that both 
pressure and low temperature are needed to produce the desired result. 
If a gas is cooled and compressed at the same time, liquefaction 
occurs much more surely and easily than though either factor alone 
were depended upon. The air which surrounds us, and of whose existence 
we are scarcely aware, can be reduced to the form of a liquid, but the 
pressure exerted upon the portion to be liquefied must be thirty-nine 
times as great as the atmospheric pressure, and the temperature must 
have been reduced to a very low point. 

93. Artificial Ice. Ammonia gas is liquefied by strong pressure and 
low temperature and is then allowed to flow into pipes which run 
through tanks containing salt water. The reduction of pressure causes 
the liquid to evaporate or turn to a gas, and the fall of temperature 
which always accompanies evaporation means a lowering of the 
temperature of the salt water to 16? or 18? below zero. But immersed 
in the salt water are molds containing pure water, and since the 
freezing point of water is 0? C, the water in the molds freezes and 
can be drawn from the mold as solid cakes of ice. 

[Illustration: FIG. 56.--Apparatus for making artificial ice.] 

Ammonia gas is driven by the pump _C_ into the coil _D_ (Fig. 56) 
under a pressure strong enough to liquefy it, the heat generated by 
this compression being carried off by cold water which constantly 
circulates through _B_. The liquid ammonia flows through the 
regulating valve _V_ into the coil _E_, in which the pressure is kept 
low by the pump _C_. The accompanying expansion reduces the 
temperature to a very low degree, and the brine which circulates 
around the coil _E_ acquires a temperature below the freezing point of 
pure water. The cold brine passes from _A_ to a tank in which are 
immersed cans filled with water, and within a short time the water in 
==========
the cans is frozen into solid cakes of ice. 




CHAPTER IX 

INVISIBLE OBJECTS 


94. Very Small Objects. We saw in Section 84 that gases have a 
tendency to expand, but that they can be compressed by the application 
of force. This observation has led scientists to suppose that 
substances are composed of very minute particles called molecules, 
separated by small spaces called pores; and that when a gas is 
condensed, the pores become smaller, and that when a gas expands, the 
pores become larger. 

The fact that certain substances are soluble, like sugar in water, 
shows that the molecules of sugar find a lodging place in the spaces 
or pores between the molecules of water, in much the same way that 
pebbles find lodgment in the chinks of the coal in a coal scuttle. An 
indefinite quantity of sugar cannot be dissolved in a given quantity 
of liquid, because after a certain amount of sugar has been dissolved 
all the pores become filled, and there is no available molecular 
space. The remainder of the sugar settles at the bottom of the vessel, 
and cannot be dissolved by any amount of stirring. 

If a piece of potassium permanganate about the size of a grain of sand 
is put into a quart of water, the solid disappears and the water 
becomes a deep rich red. The solid evidently has dissolved and has 
broken up into minute particles which are too small to be seen, but 
which have scattered themselves and lodged in the pores of the water, 
thus giving the water its rich color. 

There is no visible proof of the existence of molecules and molecular 
spaces, because not only are our eyes unable to see them directly, but 
even the most powerful microscope cannot make them visible to us. They 
are so small that if one thousand of them were laid side by side, they 
would make a speck too small to be seen by the eye and too small to be 
visible under the most powerful microscope. 

==========
We cannot see molecules or molecular pores, but the phenomena of 
compression and expansion, solubility and other equally convincing 
facts, have led us to conclude that all substances are composed of 
very minute particles or molecules separated by spaces called pores. 

95. Journeys Made by Molecules. If a gas jet is turned on and not 
lighted, an odor of gas soon becomes perceptible, not only throughout 
the room, but in adjacent halls and even in distant rooms. An uncorked 
bottle of cologne scents an entire room, the odor of a rose or violet 
permeates the atmosphere near and far. These simple everyday 
occurrences seem to show that the molecules of a gas must be in a 
state of continual and rapid motion. In the case of the cologne, some 
molecules must have escaped from the liquid by the process of 
evaporation and traveled through the air to the nose. We know that the 
molecules of a liquid are in motion and are continually passing into 
the air because in time the vessel becomes empty. The only way in 
which this could happen would be for the molecules of the liquid to 
pass from the liquid into the surrounding medium; but this is really 
saying that the molecules are in motion. 

From these phenomena and others it is reasonably clear that substances 
are composed of molecules, and that molecules are not inert, quiet 
particles, but that they are in incessant motion, moving rapidly 
hither and thither, sometimes traveling far, sometimes near. Even the 
log of wood which lies heavy and motionless on our woodpile is made 
up of countless billions of molecules each in rapid incessant motion. 
The molecules of solid bodies cannot escape so readily as those of 
liquids and gases, and do not travel far. The log lies year after year 
in an apparently motionless condition, but if one's eyes were keen 
enough, the molecules would be seen moving among themselves, even 
though they cannot escape into the surrounding medium and make long 
journeys as do the molecules of liquids and gases. 

96. The Companions of Molecules. Common sense tells us that a 
molecule of water is not the same as a molecule of vinegar; the 
molecules of each are extremely small and in rapid motion, but they 
differ essentially, otherwise one substance would be like every other 
substance. What is it that makes a molecule of water differ from a 
molecule of vinegar, and each differ from all other molecules? Strange 
to say, a molecule is not a simple object, but is quite complex, being 
composed of one or more smaller particles, called atoms, and the 
number and kind of atoms in a molecule determine the type of the 
molecule, and the type of the molecule determines the substance. For 
example, a glass of water is composed of untold millions of molecules, 
and each molecule is a company of three still smaller particles, one 
of which is called the oxygen atom and two of which are alike in every 
particular and are called hydrogen atoms. 

97. Simple Molecules. Generally molecules are composed of atoms 
which are different in kind. For example, the molecule of water has 
two different atoms, the oxygen atom and the hydrogen atoms; alcohol 
has three different kinds of atoms, oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon. 
Sometimes, however, molecules are composed of a group of atoms all of 
which are alike. Now there are but seventy or eighty different kinds 
of atoms, and hence there can be but seventy or eighty different 
substances whose molecules are composed of atoms which are alike. When 
the atoms comprising a molecule are all alike, the substance is called 
==========
an element, and is said to be a simple substance. Throughout the 
length and breadth of this vast world of ours there are only about 
eighty known elements. An element is the simplest substance 
conceivable, because it has not been separated into anything simpler. 
Water is a compound substance. It can be separated into oxygen and 
hydrogen. 

Gold, silver, and lead are examples of elements, and water, alcohol, 
cider, sand, and marble are complex substances, or compounds, as we 
are apt to call them. Everything, no matter what its size or shape or 
character, is formed from the various combinations into molecules of a 
few simple atoms, of which there exist about eighty known different 
kinds. But few of the eighty known elements play an important part in 
our everyday life. The elements in which we are most interested are 
given in the following table, and the symbols by which they are known 
are placed in columns to the right: 

|Oxygen |O |Copper |Cu |Phosphorus |P | 
|Hydrogen |H |Iodine |I |Potassium |K | 
|Carbon |C |Iron |Fe |Silver |Ag | 
|Aluminium Al |Lead |Pb |Sodium |Na | | 
|Calcium |Ca |Nickel |Ni |Sulphur |S | 
|Chlorine |Cl |Nitrogen |N |Tin |Sn | 

We have seen in an earlier experiment that twice as much hydrogen as 
oxygen can be obtained from water. Two atoms of the element hydrogen 
unite with one atom of the element oxygen to make one molecule of 
water. In symbols we express this H_2O. A group of symbols, such as 
this, expressing a molecule of a compound is called a _formula_. NaCl 
==========
is the formula for sodium chloride, which is the chemical name of 
common salt. 




CHAPTER X 

LIGHT 


98. What Light Does for Us. Heat keeps us warm, cooks our food, 
drives our engines, and in a thousand ways makes life comfortable and 
pleasant, but what should we do without light? How many of us could be 
happy even though warm and well fed if we were forced to live in the 
dark where the sunbeams never flickered, where the shadows never stole 
across the floor, and where the soft twilight could not tell us that 
==========
the day was done? Heat and light are the two most important physical 
factors in life; we cannot say which is the more necessary, because in 
the extreme cold or arctic regions man cannot live, and in the dark 
places where the light never penetrates man sickens and dies. Both 
heat and light are essential to life, and each has its own part to 
play in the varied existence of man and plant and animal. 

Light enables us to see the world around us, makes the beautiful 
colors of the trees and flowers, enables us to read, is essential to 
the taking of photographs, gives us our moving pictures and our magic 
lanterns, produces the exquisite tints of stained-glass windows, and 
brings us the joy of the rainbow. We do not always realize that light 
is beneficial, because sometimes it fades our clothing and our 
carpets, and burns our skin and makes it sore. But we shall see that 
even these apparently harmful effects of light are in reality of great 
value in man's constant battle against disease. 

99. The Candle. Natural heat and light are furnished by the sun, but 
the absence of the sun during the evening makes artificial light 
necessary, and even during the day artificial light is needed in 
buildings whose structure excludes the natural light of the sun. 
Artificial light is furnished by electricity, by gas, by oil in lamps, 
and in numerous other ways. Until modern times candles were the main 
source of light, and indeed to-day the intensity, or power, of any 
light is measured in candle power units, just as length is measured in 
yards; for example, an average gas jet gives a 10 candle power light, 
or is ten times as bright as a candle; an ordinary incandescent 
electric light gives a 16 candle power light, or furnishes sixteen 
times as much light as a candle. Very strong large oil lamps can at 
times yield a light of 60 candle power, while the large arc lamps 
which flash out on the street corners are said to furnish 1200 times 
as much light as a single candle. Naturally all candles do not give 
the same amount of light, nor are all candles alike in size. The 
candles which decorate our tea tables are of wax, while those which 
serve for general use are of paraffin and tallow. 

[Illustration: FIG. 57.--A photograph at _a_ receives four times as 
much light as when held at _b_.] 

100. Fading Illumination. The farther we move from a light, the less 
strong, or intense, is the illumination which reaches us; the light of 
the street lamp on the corner fades and becomes dim before the middle 
of the block is reached, so that we look eagerly for the next lamp. 
The light diminishes in brightness much more rapidly than we realize, 
as the following simple experiment will show. Let a single candle 
(Fig. 57) serve as our light, and at a distance of one foot from the 
candle place a photograph. In this position the photograph receives a 
definite amount of light from the candle and has a certain brightness. 

If now we place a similar photograph directly behind the first 
photograph and at a distance of two feet from the candle, the second 
photograph receives no light because the first one cuts off all the 
light. If, however, the first photograph is removed, the light which 
fell on it passes outward and spreads itself over a larger area, until 
at the distance of the second photograph the light spreads itself over 
four times as large an area as formerly. At this distance, then, the 
illumination on the second photograph is only one fourth as strong as 
it was on a similar photograph held at a distance of one foot from the 
candle. 

The photograph or object placed at a distance of one foot from a light 
is well illuminated; if it is placed at a distance of two feet, the 
illumination is only one fourth as strong, and if the object is placed 
three feet away, the illumination is only one ninth as strong. This 
fact should make us have thought and care in the use of our eyes. We 
think we are sixteen times as well off with our incandescent lights as 
our ancestors were with simple candles, but we must reflect that our 
ancestors kept the candle near them, "at their elbow," so to speak, 
while we sit at some distance from the light and unconcernedly read 
and sew. 

As an object recedes from a light the illumination which it receives 
diminishes rapidly, for the strength of the illumination is inversely 
proportional to the square of distance of the object from the light. 
Our ancestors with a candle at a distance of one foot from a book were 
as well off as we are with an incandescent light four feet away. 

101. Money Value of Light. Light is bought and sold almost as 
readily as are the products of farm and dairy; many factories, 
churches, and apartments pay a definite sum for electric light of a 
standard strength, and naturally full value is desired. An instrument 
for measuring the strength of a light is called a photometer, and 
there are many different varieties, just as there are varieties of 
scales which measure household articles. One light-measuring scale 
depends upon the law that the intensity of illumination decreases with 
the square of the distance of the object from the light. Suppose we 
wish to measure the strength of the electric light bulbs in our homes, 
in order to see whether we are getting the specified illumination. In 
front of a screen place a black rod (Fig. 58) which is illuminated by 
two different lights; namely, a standard candle and an incandescent 
bulb whose strength is to be measured. Two shadows of the rod will 
fall on the screen, one caused by the candle and the other caused by 
the incandescent light. The shadow due to the latter source is not so 
dark as that due to the candle. Now let the incandescent light be 
moved away from the screen until the two shadows are of equal 
darkness. If the incandescent light is four times as far away from the 
screen as the candle, and the shadows are equal, we know, by Section 
100, that its strength is sixteen candle power. If the incandescent 
light is four times as far away from the screen as the candle is, its 
power must be sixteen times as great, and we know the company is 
furnishing the standard amount of light for a sixteen candle power 
electric bulb. If, however, the bulb must be moved nearer to the rod 
in order that the two shadows may be similar then the light given by 
the bulb is less than sixteen candle power, and less than that due the 
==========
consumer. 

[Illustration: FIG. 58.--The two shadows are equally dark.] 

102. How Light Travels. We never expect to see around a corner, and 
if we wish to see through pinholes in three separate pieces of 
cardboard, we place the cardboards so that the three holes are in a 
straight line. When sunlight enters a dark room through a small 
opening, the dust particles dancing in the sun show a straight ray. If 
a hole is made in a card, and the card is held in front of a light, 
the card casts a shadow, in the center of which is a bright spot. The 
light, the hole, and the bright spot are all in the same straight 
line. These simple observations lead us to think that light travels in 
a straight line. 

[Illustration: FIG. 59.--The candle cannot be seen unless the three 
pinholes are in a strait line.] 

We can always tell the direction from which light comes, either by the 
shadow cast or by the bright spot formed when an opening occurs in the 
opaque object casting the shadow. If the shadow of a tree falls 
towards the west, we know the sun must be in the cast; if a bright 
spot is on the floor, we can easily locate the light whose rays stream 
through an opening and form the bright spot. We know that light 
travels in a straight line, and following the path of the beam which 
comes to our eyes, we are sure to locate the light. 

103. Good and Bad Mirrors. As we walk along the street, we 
==========
frequently see ourselves reflected in the shop windows, in polished 
metal signboards, in the metal trimmings of wagons and automobiles; 
but in mirrors we get the best image of ourselves. We resent the image 
given by a piece of tin, because the reflection is distorted and does 
not picture us as we really are; a rough surface does not give a fair 
representation; if we want a true image of ourselves, we must use a 
smooth surface like a mirror as a reflector. If the water in a pond 
is absolutely still, we get a clear, true image of the trees, but if 
there are ripples on the surface, the reflection is blurred and 
distorted. A metal roof reflects so much light that the eyes are 
dazzled by it, and a whitewashed fence injures the eyes because of the 
glare which comes from the reflected light. Neither of these could be 
called mirrors, however, because although they reflect light, they 
reflect it so irregularly that not even a suggestion of an image can 
be obtained. 

Most of us are sufficiently familiar with mirrors to know that the 
image is a duplicate of ourselves with regard to size, shape, color, 
and expression, but that it appears to be back of the mirror, while we 
are actually in front of the mirror. The image appears not only behind 
the mirror, but it is also exactly as far back of the mirror as we are 
in front of it; if we approach the mirror, the image also draws 
nearer; if we withdraw, it likewise recedes. 

104. The Path of Light. If a mirror or any other polished surface is 
held in the path of a sunbeam, some of the light is reflected, and by 
rotating the mirror the reflected sunbeam may be made to take any 
path. School children amuse themselves by reflecting sunbeams from a 
mirror into their companions' faces. If the companion moves his head 
in order to avoid the reflected beam, his tormentor moves or inclines 
the mirror and flashes the beam back to his victim's face. 

If a mirror is held so that a ray of light strikes it in a 
perpendicular direction, the light is reflected backward along the 
path by which it came. If, however, the light makes an angle with the 
mirror, its direction is changed, and it leaves the mirror along a new 
path. By observation we learn that when a beam strikes the mirror and 
makes an angle of 30? with the perpendicular, the beam is reflected in 
such a way that its new path also makes an angle of 30? with the 
perpendicular. If the sunbeam strikes the mirror at an angle of 32? 
with the perpendicular, the path of the reflected ray also makes an 
angle of 32? with the perpendicular. The ray (_AC_, Fig. 60) which 
falls upon the mirror is called the incident ray, and the angle which 
the incident ray (_AC_) makes with the perpendicular (_BC_) to the 
mirror, at the point where the ray strikes the mirror, is called the 
angle of incidence. The angle formed by the reflected ray (_CD_) and 
this same perpendicular is called the angle of reflection. Observation 
and experiment have taught us that light is always reflected in such a 
way that the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence. Light 
is not the only illustration we have of the law of reflection. Every 
child who bounces a ball makes use of this law, but he uses it 
unconsciously. If an elastic ball is thrown perpendicularly against 
the floor, it returns to the sender; if it is thrown against the floor 
at an angle (Fig. 61), it rebounds in the opposite direction, but 
always in such a way that the angle of reflection equals the angle of 
incidence. 

[Illustration: FIG. 60.--The ray _AC_ is reflected as _CD_.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 61.--A bouncing ball illustrates the law of 
reflection.] 

105. Why the Image seems to be behind the Mirror. If a candle is 
placed in front of a mirror, as in Figure 62, one of the rays of light 
which leaves the candle will fall upon the mirror as _AB_ and will be 
reflected as _BC_ (in such a way that the angle of reflection equals 
the angle of incidence). If an observer stands at _C_, he will think 
that the point _A_ of the candle is somewhere along the line _CB_ 
extended. Such a supposition would be justified from Section 102. But 
the candle sends out light in all directions; one ray therefore will 
strike the mirror as _AD_ and will be reflected as _DE_, and an 
==========
observer at _E_ will think that the point _A_ of the candle is 
somewhere along the line _ED_. In order that both observers may be 
correct, that is, in order that the light may seem to be in both these 
directions, the image of the point _A_ must seem to be at the 
intersection of the two lines. In a similar manner it can be shown 
that every point of the image of the candle seems to be behind the 
mirror. 

[Illustration: FIG. 62.--The image is a duplicate of the object, but 
appears to be behind the mirror.] 

It can be shown by experiment that the distance of the image behind 
the mirror is equal to the distance of the object in front of the 
mirror. 

106. Why Objects are Visible. If the beam of light falls upon a 
sheet of paper, or upon a photograph, instead of upon a smooth 
polished surface, no definite reflected ray will be seen, but a glare 
will be produced by the scattering of the beam of light. The surface 
of the paper or photograph is rough, and as a result, it scatters the 
beam in every direction. It is hard for us to realize that a smooth 
sheet of paper is by no means so smooth as it looks. It is rough 
compared with a polished mirror. The law of reflection always holds, 
however, no matter what the reflecting surface is,--the angle of 
reflection always equals the angle of incidence. In a smooth body the 
reflected beams are all parallel; in a rough body, the reflected beams 
are inclined to each other in all sorts of ways, and no two beams 
leave the paper in exactly the same direction. 

[Illustration: FIG. 63.--The surface of the paper, although smooth in 
==========
appearance, is in reality rough, and scatters the light in every 
direction.] 

Hot coals, red-hot stoves, gas flames, and candles shine by their own 
light, and are self-luminous. Objects like chairs, tables, carpets, 
have no light within themselves and are visible only when they receive 
light from a luminous source and reflect that light. We know that 
these objects are not self-luminous, because they are not visible at 
night unless a lamp or gas is burning. When light from any luminous 
object falls upon books, desks, or dishes, it meets rough surfaces, 
and hence undergoes diffuse reflection, and is scattered irregularly 
in all directions. No matter where the eye is, some reflected rays 
enter it, and the various objects are clearly seen. 




CHAPTER XI 

REFRACTION 


==========
107. Bent Rays of Light. A straw in a glass of lemonade seems to be 
broken at the surface of the liquid, the handle of a teaspoon in a cup 
of water appears broken, and objects seen through a glass of water may 
seem distorted and changed in size. When light passes from air into 
water, or from any transparent substance into another of different 
density, its direction is changed, and it emerges along an entirely 
new path (Fig. 64). We know that light rays pass through glass, 
because we can see through the window panes and through our 
spectacles; we know that light rays pass through water, because we can 
see through a glass of clear water; on the other hand, light rays 
cannot pass through wood, leather, metal, etc. 

[Illustration: FIG. 64.--A straw or stick in water seems broken.] 

Whenever light meets a transparent substance obliquely, some of it is 
reflected, undergoing a change in its direction; and some of it passes 
onward through the medium, but the latter portion passes onward along 
a new path. The ray _RO_ (Fig. 65) passes obliquely through the air to 
the surface of the water, but, on entering the water, it is bent or 
refracted and takes the new path _OS_. The angle _AOR_ is called the 
angle of incidence. The angle _POS_ is called the angle of refraction. 

[Illustration: FIG. 65.--When the ray _RO_ enters the water, its path 
changes to _OS_.] 

The angle of refraction is the angle formed by the refracted ray and 
the perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light strikes 
it. 

When light passes from air into water or glass, the refracted ray is 
bent toward the perpendicular, so that the angle of refraction is 
smaller than the angle of incidence. When a ray of light passes from 
water or glass into air, the refracted ray is bent away from the 
perpendicular so that the angle of refraction is greater than the 
angle of incidence. 

The bending or deviation of light in its passage from one substance to 
another is called refraction. 

108. How Refraction Deceives us. Refraction is the source of many 
illusions; bent rays of light make objects appear where they really 
are not. A fish at _A_ (Fig. 66) seems to be at _B_. The end of the 
stick in Figure 64 seems to be nearer the surface of the water than it 
really is. 

[Illustration: FIG. 66.--A fish at _A_ seems to be at _B_.] 

The light from the sun, moon, and stars can reach us only by passing 
through the atmosphere, but in Section 76, we learned that the 
atmosphere varies in density from level to level; hence all the light 
which travels through the atmosphere is constantly deviated from its 
original path, and before the light reaches the eye it has undergone 
many changes in direction. Now we learned in Section 102, that the 
direction of the rays of light as they enter the eye determines the 
direction in which an object is seen; hence the sun, moon, and stars 
seem to be along the lines which enter the eye, although in reality 
they are not. 

109. Uses of Refraction. If it were not for refraction, or the 
deviation of light in its passage from medium to medium, the wonders 
==========
and beauties of the magic lantern and the camera would be unknown to 
us; sun, moon, and stars could not be made to yield up their distant 
secrets to us in photographs; the comfort and help of spectacles would 
be lacking, spectacles which have helped unfold to many the rare 
beauties of nature, such as a clear view of clouds and sunset, of 
humming bee and flying bird. Books with their wealth of entertainment 
and information would be sealed to a large part of mankind, if glasses 
did not assist weak eyes. 

By refraction the magnifying glass reveals objects hidden because of 
their minuteness, and enlarges for our careful contemplation objects 
otherwise barely visible. The watchmaker, unassisted by the magnifying 
glass, could not detect the tiny grains of dust or sand which clog the 
delicate wheels of our watches. The merchant, with his lens, examines 
the separate threads of woolen and silk fabrics to determine the 
strength and value of the material. The physician, with his invaluable 
microscope, counts the number of infinitesimal corpuscles in the blood 
and bases his prescription on that count; he examines the sputum of a 
patient to determine whether tuberculosis wastes the system. The 
bacteriologist with the same instrument scrutinizes the drinking water 
and learns whether the dangerous typhoid germs are present. The 
future of medicine will depend somewhat upon the additional secrets 
which man is able to force from nature through the use of powerful 
lenses, because as lenses have, in the past, been the means of 
revealing disease germs, so in the future more powerful lenses may 
serve to bring to light germs yet unknown. How refraction accomplishes 
these results will be explained in the following Sections. 

==========
110. The Window Pane. We have seen that light is bent when it passes 
from one medium to another of different density, and that objects 
viewed by refracted light do not appear in their proper positions. 

When a ray of light passes through a piece of plane glass, such as a 
window pane (Fig. 67), it is refracted at the point _B_ toward the 
perpendicular, and continues its course through the glass in the new 
direction _BC_. On emerging from the glass, the light is refracted 
away from the perpendicular and takes the direction _CD_, which is 
clearly parallel to its original direction. Hence, when we view 
objects through the window, we see them slightly displaced in 
position, but otherwise unchanged. The deviation or displacement 
caused by glass as thin as window panes is too slight to be noticed, 
and we are not conscious that objects are out of position. 

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--Objects looked at through a window pane seem 
to be in their natural place.] 

111. Chandelier Crystals and Prisms. When a ray of light passes 
through plane glass, like a window pane, it is shifted somewhat, but 
its direction does not change; that is, the emergent ray is parallel 
to the incident ray. But when a beam of light passes through a 
triangular glass prism, such as a chandelier crystal, its direction is 
greatly changed, and an object viewed through a prism is seen quite 
out of its true position. 

Whenever light passes through a prism, it is bent toward the base of 
the prism, or toward the thick portion of the prism, and emerges from 
the prism in quite a different direction from that in which it entered 
(Fig. 68). Hence, when an object is looked at through a prism, it is 
seen quite out of place. In Figure 68, the candle seems to be at _S_, 
while in reality it is at _A_. 

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--When looked at through the prism, _A_ seems 
to be at _S_.] 

112. Lenses. If two prisms are arranged as in Figure 69, and two 
parallel rays of light fall upon the prisms, the beam _A_ will be bent 
downward toward the thickened portion of the prism, and the beam _B_ 
will be bent upward toward the thick portion of the prism, and after 
passing through the prism the two rays will intersect at some point 
_F_, called a focus. 

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--Rays of light are converged and focused at 
_F_.] 

==========
If two prisms are arranged as in Figure 70, the ray _A_ will be 
refracted upward toward the thick end, and the ray _B_ will be 
refracted downward toward the thick end; the two rays, on emerging, 
will therefore be widely separated and will not intersect. 

[Illustration: FIG. 70.--Rays of light are diverged and do not come to 
any real focus.] 

Lenses are very similar to prisms; indeed, two prisms placed as in 
Figure 69, and rounded off, would make a very good convex lens. A lens 
is any transparent material, but usually glass, with one or both sides 
curved. The various types of lenses are shown in Figure 71. 

[Illustration: FIG. 71.--The different types of lenses.] 

The first three types focus parallel rays at some common point _F_, as 
in Figure 69. Such lenses are called convex or converging lenses. The 
last three types, called concave lenses, scatter parallel rays so that 
they do not come to a focus, but diverge widely after passage through 
the lens. 

113. The Shape and Material of a Lens. The main or principal focus 
of a lens, that is, the point at which rays parallel to the base line 
_AB_ meet (Fig. 71), depends upon the shape of the lens. For example, 
a thick lens, such as _A_ (Fig. 72), focuses the rays very near to the 
lens; _B_, which is not so thick, focuses the rays at a greater 
distance from the lens; and _C_, which is a very thin lens, focuses 
the rays at a considerable distance from the lens. The distance of the 
principal focus from the lens is called the focal length of the lens, 
and from the diagrams we see that the more convex the lens, the 
shorter the focal length. 

[Illustration: FIG. 72.--The more curved the lens, the shorter the 
focal length, and the nearer the focus is to the lens.] 

The position of the principal focus depends not only on the shape of 
the lens, but also on the refractive power of the material composing 
the lens. A lens made of ice would not deviate the rays of light so 
much as a lens of similar shape composed of glass. The greater the 
refractive power of the lens, the greater the bending, and the nearer 
the principal focus to the lens. 

There are many different kinds of glass, and each kind of glass 
refracts the light differently. Flint glass contains lead; the lead 
makes the glass dense, and gives it great refractive power, enabling 
it to bend and separate light in all directions. Cut glass and toilet 
articles are made of flint glass because of the brilliant effects 
caused by its great refractive power, and imitation gems are commonly 
nothing more than polished flint glass. 

==========
114. How Lenses Form Images. Suppose we place an arrow, _A_, in 
front of a convex lens (Fig. 73). The ray _AC_, parallel to the 
principal axis, will pass through the lens and emerge as _DE_. The ray 
is always bent toward the thick portion of the lens, both at its 
entrance into the lens and its emergence from the lens. 

[Illustration: FIG. 73.--The image is larger than the object. By means 
of a lens, a watchmaker gets an enlarged image of the dust which clogs 
the wheels of his watch.] 

In Section 105, we saw that two rays determine the position of any 
point of our image; hence in order to locate the image of the top of 
the arrow, we need to consider but one more ray from the top of the 
object. The most convenient ray to choose would be one passing through 
_O_, the optical center of the lens, because such a ray passes through 
the lens unchanged in direction, as is clear from Figure 74. The point 
where _AC_ and _AO_ meet after refraction will be the position of the 
top of the arrow. Similarly it can be shown that the center of the 
arrow will be at the point _T_, and we see that the image is larger 
than the object. This can be easily proved experimentally. Let a 
convex lens be placed near a candle (Fig. 75); move a paper screen 
back and forth behind the lens; for some position of the screen a 
clear, enlarged image of the candle will be made. 

[Illustration: FIG. 74.--Rays above _O_ are bent downward, those below 
_O_ are bent upward, and rays through _O_ emerge from the lens 
unchanged in direction.] 

If the candle or arrow is placed in a new position, say at _MA_ (Fig. 
76), the image formed is smaller than the object, and is nearer to the 
lens than it was before. Move the lens so that its distance from the 
candle is increased, and then find the image on a piece of paper. The 
size and position of the image depend upon the distance of the object 
from the lens (Fig. _77_). By means of a lens one can easily get on a 
visiting card a picture of a distant church steeple. 

[Illustration: FIG. 75.--The lens is held in such a position that the 
image of the candle is larger than the object.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 76.--The image is smaller than the object.] 

115. The Value of Lenses. If it were not for the fact that a lens 
can be held at such a distance from an object as to make the image 
larger than the object, it would be impossible for the lens to assist 
the watchmaker in locating the small particles of dust which clog the 
wheels of the watch. If it were not for the opposite fact--that a lens 
can be held at such a distance from the object as to make an image 
smaller than the object, it would be impossible to have a photograph 
of a tall tree or building unless the photograph were as large as the 
tree itself. When a photographer takes a photograph of a person or a 
tree, he moves his camera until the image formed by the lens is of the 
desired size. By bringing the camera (really the lens of the camera) 
near, we obtain a large-sized photograph; by increasing the distance 
between the camera and the object, a smaller photograph is obtained. 
The mountain top may be so far distant that in the photograph it will 
not appear to be greater than a small stone. 

[Illustration: FIG. 77.--The lens is placed in such a position that 
the image is about the same size as the object.] 
==========

Many familiar illustrations of lenses, or curved refracting surfaces, 
and their work, are known to all of us. Fish globes magnify the fish 
that swim within. Bottles can be so shaped that they make the olives, 
pickles, and peaches that they contain appear larger than they really 
are. The fruit in bottles frequently seems too large to have gone 
through the neck of the bottle. The deception is due to refraction, 
and the material and shape of the bottle furnish a sufficient 
explanation. 

By using combinations of two or more lenses of various kinds, it is 
possible to have an image of almost any desired size, and in 
practically any desired position. 

116. The Human Eye. In Section 114, we obtained on a movable screen, 
by means of a simple lens, an image of a candle. The human eye 
possesses a most wonderful lens and screen (Fig. 78); the lens is 
==========
called the crystalline lens, and the screen is called the retina. Rays 
of light pass from the object through the pupil _P_, go through the 
crystalline lens _L_, where they are refracted, and then pass onward 
to the retina _R_, where they form a distinct image of the object. 

[Illustration: FIG. 78.--The eye.] 

We learned in Section 114 that a change in the position of the object 
necessitated a change in the position of the screen, and that every 
time the object was moved the position of the screen had to be altered 
before a clear image of the object could be obtained. The retina of 
the eye cannot be moved backward and forward, as the screen was, and 
the crystalline lens is permanently located directly back of the iris. 
How, then, does it happen that we can see clearly both near and 
distant objects; that the printed page which is held in the hand is 
visible at one second, and that the church spire on the distant 
horizon is visible the instant the eyes are raised from the book? How 
is it possible to obtain on an immovable screen by means of a simple 
lens two distinct images of objects at widely varying distances? 

The answer to these questions is that the crystalline lens changes 
shape according to need. The lens is attached to the eye by means of 
small muscles, _m_, and it is by the action of these muscles that the 
lens is able to become small and thick, or large and thin; that is, to 
become more or less curved. When we look at near objects, the muscles 
act in such a way that the lens bulges out, and becomes thick in the 
middle and of the right curvature to focus the near object upon the 
screen. When we look at an object several hundred feet away, the 
muscles change their pull on the lens and flatten it until it is of 
the proper curvature for the new distance. The adjustment of the 
muscles is so quick and unconscious that we normally do not experience 
any difficulty in changing our range of view. The ability of the eye 
to adjust itself to varying distances is called accommodation. The 
power of adjustment in general decreases with age. 

117. Farsightedness and Nearsightedness. A farsighted person is one 
who cannot see near objects so distinctly as far objects, and who in 
many cases cannot see near objects at all. The eyeball of a farsighted 
person is very short, and the retina is too close to the crystalline 
lens. Near objects are brought to a focus behind the retina instead of 
on it, and hence are not visible. Even though the muscles of 
accommodation do their best to bulge and thicken the lens, the rays of 
light are not bent sufficiently to focus sharply on the retina. In 
consequence objects look blurred. Farsightedness can be remedied by 
convex glasses, since they bend the light and bring it to a closer 
focus. Convex glasses, by bending the rays and bringing them to a 
nearer focus, overbalance a short eyeball with its tendency to focus 
objects behind the retina. 

[Illustration: FIG. 79.--The farsighted eye.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 80.--The defect is remedied by convex glasses.] 

A nearsighted person is one who cannot see objects unless they are 
close to the eye. The eyeball of a nearsighted person is very wide, 
and the retina is too far away from the crystalline lens. Far objects 
are brought to a focus in front of the retina instead of on it, and 
hence are not visible. Even though the muscles of accommodation do 
their best to pull out and flatten the lens, the rays are not 
separated sufficiently to focus as far back as the retina. In 
consequence objects look blurred. Nearsightedness can be remedied by 
wearing concave glasses, since they separate the light and move the 
focus farther away. Concave glasses, by separating the rays and making 
the focus more distant, overbalance a wide eyeball with its tendency 
to focus objects in front of the retina. 
==========

[Illustration: FIG. 81.--The nearsighted eye. The defect is remedied 
by concave glasses.] 

118. Headache and Eyes. Ordinarily the muscles of accommodation 
adjust themselves easily and quickly; if, however, they do not, 
frequent and severe headaches occur as a result of too great muscular 
effort toward accommodation. Among young people headaches are 
frequently caused by over-exertion of the crystalline muscles. Glasses 
relieve the muscles of the extra adjustment, and hence are effective 
in eliminating this cause of headache. 

An exact balance is required between glasses, crystalline lens, and 
muscular activity, and only those who have studied the subject 
carefully are competent to treat so sensitive and necessary a part of 
the body as the eye. The least mistake in the curvature of the 
glasses, the least flaw in the type of glass (for example, the kind of 
glass used), means an improper focus, increased duty for the muscles, 
and gradual weakening of the entire eye, followed by headache and 
==========
general physical discomfort. 

119. Eye Strain. The extra work which is thrown upon the nervous 
system through seeing, reading, writing, and sewing with defective 
eyes is recognized by all physicians as an important cause of disease. 
The tax made upon the nervous system by the defective eye lessens the 
supply of energy available for other bodily use, and the general 
health suffers. The health is improved when proper glasses are 
prescribed. 

Possibly the greatest danger of eye strain is among school children, 
who are not experienced enough to recognize defects in sight. For this 
reason, many schools employ a physician who examines the pupils' eyes 
at regular intervals. 

The following general precautions are worth observing:-- 

1. Rest the eyes when they hurt, and as far as possible do close work, 
such as writing, reading, sewing, wood carving, etc., by daylight. 

2. Never read in a very bright or a very dim light. 

3. If the light is near, have it shaded. 

4. Do not rub the eyes with the fingers. 

5. If eyes are weak, bathe them in lukewarm water in which a pinch of 
==========
borax has been dissolved. 




CHAPTER XII 

PHOTOGRAPHY 


120. The Magic of the Sun. Ribbons and dresses washed and hung in 
the sun fade; when washed and hung in the shade, they are not so apt 
to lose their color. Clothes are laid away in drawers and hung in 
closets not only for protection against dust, but also against the 
well-known power of light to weaken color. 

Many housewives lower the window shades that the wall paper may not 
lose its brilliancy, that the beautiful hues of velvet, satin, and 
plush tapestry may not be marred by loss in brilliancy and sheen. 
==========
Bright carpets and rugs are sometimes bought in preference to more 
delicately tinted ones, because the purchaser knows that the latter 
will fade quickly if used in a sunny room, and will soon acquire a 
dull mellow tone. The bright and gay colors and the dull and somber 
colors are all affected by the sun, but why one should be affected 
more than another we do not know. Thousands of brilliant and dainty 
hues catch our eye in the shop and on the street, but not one of them 
is absolutely permanent; some may last for years, but there is always 
more or less fading in time. 

Sunlight causes many strange, unexplained effects. If the two 
substances, chlorine and hydrogen, are mixed in a dark room, nothing 
remarkable occurs any more than though water and milk were mixed, but 
if a mixture of these substances is exposed to sunlight, a violent 
explosion occurs and an entirely new substance is formed, a compound 
entirely different in character from either of its components. 

By some power not understood by man, the sun is able to form new 
substances. In the dark, chlorine and hydrogen are simply chlorine and 
hydrogen; in the sunlight they combine as if by magic into a totally 
different substance. By the same unexplained power, the sun frequently 
does just the opposite work; instead of combining two substances to 
make one new product, the sun may separate or break down some 
particular substance into its various elements. For example, if the 
==========
sun's rays fall upon silver chloride, a chemical action immediately 
begins, and as a result we have two separate substances, chlorine and 
silver. The sunlight separates silver chloride into its constituents, 
silver and chlorine. 

121. The Magic Wand in Photography. Suppose we coat one side of a 
glass plate with silver chloride, just as we might put a coat of 
varnish on a chair. We must be very careful to coat the plate in the 
dark room,[B] otherwise the sunlight will separate the silver chloride 
and spoil our plan. Then lay a horseshoe on the plate for good luck, 
and carry the plate out into the light for a second. The light will 
separate the silver chloride into chlorine and silver, the latter of 
which will remain on the plate as a thin film. All of the plate was 
affected by the sun except the portion protected by the horseshoe 
which, because it is opaque, would not allow light to pass through and 
reach the plate. If now the plate is carried back to the dark room and 
the horseshoe is removed, one would expect to see on the plate an 
impression of the horseshoe, because the portion protected by the 
horseshoe would be covered by silver chloride and the exposed 
unprotected portion would be covered by metallic silver. But we are 
much disappointed because the plate, when examined ever so carefully, 
shows not the slightest change in appearance. The change is there, but 
the unaided eye cannot detect the change. Some chemical, the 
so-called "developer," must be used to bring out the hidden change and 
to reveal the image to our unseeing eyes. There are many different 
developers in use, any one of which will effect the necessary 
transformation. When the plate has been in the developer for a few 
seconds, the silver coating gradually darkens, and slowly but surely 
the image printed by the sun's rays appears. But we must not take this 
picture into the light, because the silver chloride which was 
protected by the horseshoe is still present, and would be strongly 
affected by the first glimmer of light, and, as a result, our entire 
plate would become similar in character and there would be no contrast 
to give an image of the horseshoe on the plate. 

[Footnote B: That is, a room from which ordinary daylight is 
excluded.] 

But a photograph on glass, which must be carefully shielded from the 
light and admired only in the dark room, would be neither pleasurable 
nor practical. If there were some way by which the hitherto unaffected 
silver chloride could be totally removed, it would be possible to take 
the plate into any light without fear. To accomplish this, the 
unchanged silver chloride is got rid of by the process technically 
called "fixing"; that is, by washing off the unreduced silver chloride 
with a solution such as sodium thiosulphite, commonly known as hypo. 
After a bath in the hypo the plate is cleansed in clear running water 
and left to dry. Such a process gives a clear and permanent picture on 
the plate. 

[Illustration: FIG. 82.--A camera.] 

122. The Camera. A camera (Fig. 82) is a light-tight box containing 
a movable convex lens at one end and a screen at the opposite end. 
Light from the object to be photographed passes through the lens, 
falls upon the screen, and forms an image there. If we substitute for 
the ordinary screen a plate or film coated with silver chloride or any 
other silver salt, the light which falls upon the sensitive plate and 
forms an image there will change the silver chloride and produce a 
hidden image. If the plate is then removed from the camera in the 
dark, and is treated as described in the preceding Section, the image 
becomes visible and permanent. In practice some gelatin is mixed with 
the silver salt, and the mixture is then poured over the plate or film 
in such a way that a thin, even coating is made. It is the presence of 
the gelatin that gives plates a yellowish hue. The sensitive plates 
are left to dry in dark rooms, and when the coating has become 
absolutely firm and dry, the plates are packed in boxes and sent forth 
for sale. 

Glass plates are heavy and inconvenient to carry, so that celluloid 
films have almost entirely taken their place, at least for outdoor 
==========
work. 

123. Light and Shade. Let us apply the above process to a real 
photograph. Suppose we wish to take the photograph of a man sitting in 
a chair in his library. If the man wore a gray coat, a black tie, and 
a white collar, these details must be faithfully represented in the 
photograph. How can the almost innumerable lights and shades be 
produced on the plate? 

The white collar would send through the lens the most light to the 
sensitive plate; hence the silver chloride on the plate would be most 
changed at the place where the lens formed an image of the collar. The 
gray coat would not send to the lens so much light as the white 
collar, hence the silver chloride would be less affected by the light 
from the coat than by that from the collar, and at the place where the 
lens produced an image of the coat the silver chloride would not be 
changed so much as where the collar image is. The light from the face 
would produce a still different effect, since the light from the face 
is stronger than the light from the gray coat, but less than that from 
a white collar. The face in the image would show less changed silver 
chloride than the collar, but more than the coat, because the face is 
lighter than the coat, but not so light as the collar. Finally, the 
silver chloride would be least affected by the dark tie. The wall 
paper in the background would affect the plate according to the 
brightness of the light which fell directly upon it and which 
reflected to the camera. When such a plate has been developed and 
fixed, as described in Section 121, we have the so-called negative 
(Fig. 83). The collar is very dark, the black tie and gray coat white, 
and the white tidy very dark. 

[Illustration: FIG. 83.--A negative.] 

The lighter the object, such as tidy or collar, the more salt is 
changed, or, in other words, the greater the portion of the silver 
salt that is affected, and hence the darker the stain on the plate at 
that particular spot. The plate shows all gradations of intensity--the 
tidy is dark, the black tie is light. The photograph is true as far as 
position, form, and expression are concerned, but the actual 
intensities are just reversed. How this plate can be transformed into 
a photograph true in every detail will be seen in the following 
Section. 

124. The Perfect Photograph. Bright objects, such as the sky or a 
white waist, change much of the silver chloride, and hence appear 
dark on the negative. Dark objects, such as furniture or a black coat, 
change little of the chloride, and hence appear light on the negative. 
To obtain a true photograph, the negative is placed on a piece of 
sensitive photographic paper, or paper coated with a silver salt in 
the same manner as the plate and films. The combination is exposed to 
the light. The dark portions of the negative will act as obstructions 
to the passage of light, and but little light will pass through that 
part of the negative to the photographic paper, and consequently but 
little of the silver salt on the paper will be changed. On the other 
hand, the light portion of the negative will allow free and easy 
passage of the light rays, which will fall upon the photographic paper 
and will change much more of the silver. Thus it is that dark places 
in the negative produce light places in the positive or real 
photograph (Fig. 84), and that light places in the negative produce 
dark places in the positive; all intermediate grades are likewise 
==========
represented with their proper gradations of intensity. 

[Illustration: FIG. 84.--A positive or true photograph.] 

If properly treated, a negative remains good for years, and will serve 
for an indefinite number of positives or true photographs. 

125. Light and Disease. The far-reaching effect which light has upon 
some inanimate objects, such as photographic films and clothes, leads 
us to inquire into the relation which exists between light and living 
things. We know from daily observation that plants must have light in 
order to thrive and grow. A healthy plant brought into a dark room 
soon loses its vigor and freshness, and becomes yellow and drooping. 
Plants do not all agree as to the amount of light they require, for 
some, like the violet and the arbutus, grow best in moderate light, 
while others, like the willows, need the strong, full beams of the 
sun. But nearly all common plants, whatever they are, sicken and die 
if deprived of sunlight for a long time. This is likewise true in the 
animal world. During long transportation, animals are sometimes 
necessarily confined in dark cars, with the result that many deaths 
occur, even though the car is well aired and ventilated and the food 
supply good. Light and fresh air put color into pale cheeks, just as 
light and air transform sickly, yellowish plants into hardy green 
ones. Plenty of fresh air, light, and pure water are the watchwords 
against disease. 

[Illustration: FIG. 85--Stems and leaves of oxalis growing toward the 
light.] 

In addition to the plants and animals which we see, there are many 
strange unseen ones floating in the atmosphere around us, lying in the 
dust of corner and closet, growing in the water we drink, and 
thronging decayed vegetable and animal matter. Everyone knows that 
mildew and vermin do damage in the home and in the field, but very few 
understand that, in addition to these visible enemies of man, there 
are swarms of invisible plants and animals some of which do far more 
damage, both directly and indirectly, than the seen and familiar 
enemies. All such very small plants and animals are known as 
_microorganisms_. 

Not all micro?rganisms are harmful; some are our friends and are as 
helpful to us as are cultivated plants and domesticated animals. Among 
==========
the most important of the micro?rganisms are bacteria, which include 
among their number both friend and foe. In the household, bacteria are 
a fruitful source of trouble, but some of them are distinctly friends. 
The delicate flavor of butter and the sharp but pleasing taste of 
cheese are produced by bacteria. On the other hand, bacteria are the 
cause of many of the most dangerous diseases, such as typhoid fever, 
tuberculosis, influenza, and la grippe. 

By careful observation and experimentation it has been shown 
conclusively that sunlight rapidly kills bacteria, and that it is only 
in dampness and darkness that bacteria thrive and multiply. Although 
sunlight is essential to the growth of most plants and animals, it 
retards and prevents the growth of bacteria. Dirt and dust exposed to 
the sunlight lose their living bacteria, while in damp cellars and 
dark corners the bacteria thrive, increasing steadily in number. For 
this reason our houses should be kept light and airy; blinds should be 
raised, even if carpets do fade; it is better that carpets and 
furniture should fade than that disease-producing bacteria should find 
a permanent abode within our dwellings. Kitchens and pantries in 
particular should be thoroughly lighted. Bedclothes, rugs, and 
clothing should be exposed to the sunlight as frequently as possible; 
there is no better safeguard against bacterial disease than light. In 
a sick room sunlight is especially valuable, because it not only kills 
bacteria, but keeps the air dry, and new bacteria cannot get a start 
in a dry atmosphere. 




CHAPTER XIII 

==========
COLOR 


126. The Rainbow. One of the most beautiful and well-known phenomena 
in nature is the rainbow, and from time immemorial it has been 
considered Jehovah's signal to mankind that the storm is over and that 
the sunshine will remain. Practically everyone knows that a rainbow 
can be seen only when the sun's rays shine upon a mist of tiny drops 
of water. It is these tiny drops which by their refraction and their 
scattering of light produce the rainbow in the heavens. 

The exquisite tints of the rainbow can be seen if we look at an object 
through a prism or chandelier crystal, and a very simple experiment 
enables us to produce on the wall of a room the exact colors of the 
rainbow in all their beauty. 

[Illustration: FIG. 86.--White light is a mixture of lights of rainbow 
colors.] 

127. How to produce Rainbow Colors. _The Spectrum._ If a beam of 
sunlight is admitted into a dark room through a narrow opening in the 
shade, and is allowed to fall upon a prism, as shown in Figure 86, a 
beautiful band of colors will appear on the opposite wall of the room. 
The ray of light which entered the room as ordinary sunlight has not 
only been refracted and bent from its straight path, but it has been 
spread out into a band of colors similar to those of the rainbow. 

Whenever light passes through a prism or lens, it is dispersed or 
separated into all the colors which it contains, and a band of colors 
produced in this way is called a spectrum. If we examine such a 
spectrum we find the following colors in order, each color 
imperceptibly fading into the next: violet, indigo, blue, green, 
yellow, orange, red. 

128. Sunlight or White Light. White light or sunlight can be 
dispersed or separated into the primary colors or rainbow hues, as 
shown in the preceding Section. What seems even more wonderful is that 
these spectral colors can be recombined so as to make white light. 

If a prism _B_ (Fig. 87) exactly similar to _A_ in every way is placed 
behind _A_ in a reversed position, it will undo the dispersion of _A_, 
bending upward the seven different beams in such a way that they 
emerge together and produce a white spot on the screen. Thus we see, 
from two simple experiments, that all the colors of the rainbow may be 
obtained from white light, and that these colors may be in turn 
recombined to produce white light. 

[Illustration: FIG. 87.--Rainbow colors recombined to form white 
light.] 

==========
White light is not a simple light, but is composed of all the colors 
which appear in the rainbow. 

129. Color. If a piece of red glass is held in the path of the 
colored beam of light formed as in Section 127, all the colors on the 
wall will disappear except the red, and instead of a beautiful 
spectrum of all colors there will be seen the red color alone. The red 
glass does not allow the passage through it of any light except red 
light; all other colors are absorbed by the red glass and do not reach 
the eye. Only the red ray passes through the red glass, reaches the 
eye, and produces a sensation of color. 

If a piece of blue glass is substituted for the red glass, the blue 
band remains on the wall, while all the other colors disappear. If 
both blue and red pieces of glass are held in the path of the beam, so 
that the light must pass through first one and then the other, the 
entire spectrum disappears and no color remains. The blue glass 
absorbs the various rays with the exception of the blue ones, and the 
red glass will not allow these blue rays to pass through it; hence no 
light is allowed passage to the eye. 

An emerald looks green because it freely transmits green, but absorbs 
the other colors of which ordinary daylight is composed. A diamond 
appears white because it allows the passage through it of all the 
various rays; this is likewise true of water and window panes. 

Stained-glass windows owe their charm and beauty to the presence in 
the glass of various dyes and pigments which absorb in different 
amounts some colors from white light and transmit others. These 
pigments or dyes are added to the glass while it is in the molten 
state, and the beauty of a stained-glass window depends largely upon 
the richness and the delicacy of the pigments used. 

130. Reflected Light. _Opaque Objects._ In Section 106 we learned 
that most objects are visible to us because of the light diffusely 
reflected from them. A white object, such as a sheet of paper, a 
whitewashed fence, or a table cloth, absorbs little of the light which 
falls upon it, but reflects nearly all, thus producing the sensation 
of white. A red carpet absorbs the light rays incident upon it except 
the red rays, and these it reflects to the eye. 

Any substance or object which reflects none of the rays which fall 
upon it, but absorbs all, appears black; no rays reach the eye, and 
there is an absence of any color sensation. Coal and tar and soot are 
good illustrations of objects which absorb all the light which falls 
upon them. 

131. How and Why Colors Change. _Matching Colors._ Most women prefer 
to shop in the morning and early afternoon when the sunlight 
illuminates shops and factories, and when gas and electricity do not 
throw their spell over colors. Practically all people know that 
ribbons and ties, trimmings and dresses, frequently look different at 
night from what they do in the daytime. It is not safe to match colors 
by artificial light; cloth which looks red by night may be almost 
purple by day. Indeed, the color of an object depends upon the color 
of the light which falls upon it. Strange sights are seen on the 
Fourth of July when variously colored fireworks are blazing. The child 
with a white blouse appears first red, then blue, then green, 
according as his powders burn red, blue, or green. The face of the 
child changes from its normal healthy hue to a brilliant red and then 
to ghastly shades. 

Suppose, for example, that a white hat is held at the red end of the 
spectrum or in any red light. The characteristics of white objects is 
their ability to reflect _all_ the various rays that fall upon them. 
Here, however, the only light which falls upon the white hat is red 
light, hence the only light which the hat has to reflect is red light 
and the hat consequently appears red. Similarly, if a white hat is 
placed in a blue light, it will reflect all the light which falls upon 
it, namely, blue light, and will appear blue. If a red hat is held in 
a red light, it is seen in its proper color. If a red hat is held in a 
blue light, it appears black; it cannot reflect any of the blue light 
because that is all absorbed and there is no red light to reflect. 

A child wearing a green frock on Independence Day seems at night to be 
wearing a black frock, if standing near powders burning with red, 
blue, or violet light. 

132. Pure, Simple Colors--Things as they Seem. To the eye white 
light appears a simple, single color. It reveals its compound nature 
to us only when passed through a prism, when it shows itself to be 
compounded of an infinite number of colors which Sir Isaac Newton 
grouped in seven divisions: violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, 
orange, and red. 

We naturally ask ourselves whether these colors which compose white 
light are themselves in turn compound? To answer that question, let us 
very carefully insert a second prism in the path of the rays which 
issue from the first prism, carefully barring out the remaining six 
kinds of rays. If the red light is compound, it will be broken up into 
its constituent parts and will form a typical spectrum of its own, 
just as white light did after its passage through a prism. But the red 
rays pass through the second prism, are refracted, and bent from this 
course, and no new colors appear, no new spectrum is formed. Evidently 
a ray of spectrum red is a simple color, not a compound color. 
==========

If a similar experiment is made with the remaining spectrum rays, the 
result is always the same: the individual spectrum colors remain 
simple, pure colors. _The individual spectrum colors are groups of 
simple, pure colors._ 

[Illustration: FIG. 88.--Violet and green give blue. Green, blue, and 
red give white.] 

133. Colors not as they Seem--Compound Colors. If one half of a 
cardboard disk (Fig. 88) is painted green, and the other half violet, 
and the disk is slipped upon a toy top, and spun rapidly, the rotating 
disk will appear blue; if red and green are used in the same way 
instead of green and violet, the rotating disk will appear yellow. A 
combination of red and yellow will give orange. The colors formed in 
this way do not appear to the eye different from the spectrum colors, 
but they are actually very different. The spectrum colors, as we saw 
in the preceding Section, are pure, simple colors, while the colors 
formed from the rotating disk are in reality compounded of several 
totally different rays, although in appearance the resulting colors 
are pure and simple. 

If it were not that colors can be compounded, we should be limited in 
hue and shade to the seven spectral colors; the wealth and beauty of 
color in nature, art, and commerce would be unknown; the flowers with 
their thousands of hues would have a poverty of color undreamed of; 
art would lose its magenta, its lilac, its olive, its lavender, and 
would have to work its wonders with the spectral colors alone. By 
compounding various colors in different proportions, new colors can be 
formed to give freshness and variety. If one third of the rotating 
disk is painted blue, and the remainder white, the result is lavender; 
if fifteen parts of white, four parts of red, and one part of blue are 
arranged on the disk, the result is lilac. Olive is obtained from a 
combination of two parts green, one part red, and one part black; and 
the soft rich shades of brown are all due to different mixtures of 
black, red, orange, or yellow. 

134. The Essential Colors. Strange and unexpected facts await us at 
every turn in science! If the rotating cardboard disk (Fig. 88) is 
painted one third red, one third green, and one third blue, the 
resulting color is white. While the mixture of the spectral colors 
produces white, it is not necessary to have all of the spectral colors 
in order to obtain white; because a mixture of the following colors 
alone, red, green, and blue, will give white. Moreover, by the mixture 
of these three colors in proper proportions, any color of the 
spectrum, such as yellow or indigo or orange, may be obtained. The 
three spectral colors, red, green, and blue, are called primary or 
essential hues, because all known tints of color may be produced by 
the careful blending of blue, green, and red in the proper 
proportions; for example, purple is obtained by the blending of red 
and blue, and orange by the blending of red and yellow. 

135. Color Blindness. The nerve fibers of the eye which carry the 
sensation of color to the brain are particularly sensitive to the 
primary colors--red, green, blue. Indeed, all color sensations are 
==========
produced by the stimulation of three sets of nerves which are 
sensitive to the primary colors. If one sees purple, it is because the 
optic nerves sensitive to red and blue (purple equals red plus blue) 
have carried their separate messages to the brain, and the blending of 
the two distinct messages in the brain has given the sensation of 
purple. If a red rose is seen, it is because the optic nerves 
sensitive to red have been stimulated and have carried the message to 
the brain. 

A snowy field stimulates equally all three sets of optic nerves--the 
red, the green, and the blue. Lavender, which is one part blue and 
three parts white, would stimulate all three sets of nerves, but with 
a maximum of stimulation for the blue. Equal stimulation of the three 
sets would give the impression of white. 

A color-blind person has some defect in one or more of the three sets 
of nerves which carry the color message to the brain. Suppose the 
nerve fibers responsible for carrying the red are totally defective. 
If such a person views a yellow flower, he will see it as a green 
flower. Yellow contains both red and green, and hence both the red and 
green nerve fibers should be stimulated, but the red nerve fibers are 
defective and do not respond, the green nerve fibers alone being 
stimulated, and the brain therefore interprets green. 

A well-known author gives an amusing incident of a dinner party, at 
which the host offered stewed tomato for apple sauce. What color 
nerves were defective in the case of the host? 

In some employments color blindness in an employee would be fatal to 
many lives. Engineers and pilots govern the direction and speed of 
trains and boats largely by the colored signals which flash out in the 
night's darkness or move in the day's bright light, and any mistake in 
the reading of color signals would imperil the lives of travelers. For 
this reason a rigid test in color is given to all persons seeking such 
employment, and the ability to match ribbons and yarns of all ordinary 
hues is an unvarying requirement for efficiency. 




CHAPTER XIV 

==========
HEAT AND LIGHT AS COMPANIONS 

"The night has a thousand eyes, 
And the day but one; 
Yet the light of the bright world dies 
With the dying sun." 


136. Most bodies which glow and give out light are hot; the stove 
which glows with a warm red is hot and fiery; smoldering wood is black 
and lifeless; glowing coals are far hotter than black ones. The 
stained-glass window softens and mellows the bright light of the sun, 
but it also shuts out some of the warmth of the sun's rays; the shady 
side of the street spares our eyes the intense glare of the sun, but 
may chill us by the absence of heat. Our illumination, whether it be 
oil lamp or gas jet or electric light, carries with it heat; indeed, 
so much heat that we refrain from making a light on a warm summer's 
night because of the heat which it unavoidably furnishes. 

137. Red a Warm Color. We have seen that heat and light usually go 
hand in hand. In summer we lower the shades and close the blinds in 
order to keep the house cool, because the exclusion of light means the 
exclusion of some heat; in winter we open the blinds and raise the 
shades in order that the sun may stream into the room and flood it 
with light and warmth. The heat of the sun and the light of the sun 
seem boon companions. 

We can show that when light passes through a prism and is refracted, 
forming a spectrum, as in Section 127, it is accompanied by heat. If 
==========
we hold a sensitive thermometer in the violet end of the spectrum so 
that the violet rays fall upon the bulb, the reading of the mercury 
will be practically the same as when the thermometer is held in any 
dark part of the room; if, however, the thermometer is slowly moved 
toward the red end of the spectrum, a change occurs and the mercury 
rises slowly but steadily, showing that heat rays are present at the 
red end of the spectrum. This agrees with the popular notion, formed 
independently of science, which calls the reds the warm colors. Every 
one of us associates red with warmth; in the summer red is rarely 
worn, it looks hot; but in winter red is one of the most pleasing 
colors because of the sense of warmth and cheer it brings. 

_All light rays are accompanied by a small amount of heat, but the red 
rays carry the most._ 

What seems perhaps the most unexpected thing, is that the temperature, 
as indicated by a sensitive thermometer, continues to rise if the 
thermometer is moved just beyond the red light of the spectrum. There 
actually seems to be more heat beyond the red than in the red, but if 
the thermometer is moved too far away, the temperature again falls. 
Later we shall see what this means. 

138. The Energy of the Sun. It is difficult to tell how much of the 
energy of the sun is light and how much is heat, but it is easy to 
determine the combined effect of heat and light. 

[Illustration: FIG. 89.--The energy of the sun can be measured in heat 
units.] 

Suppose we allow the sun's rays to fall perpendicularly upon a metal 
cylinder coated with lampblack and filled with a known quantity of 
water (Fig. 89); at the expiration of a few hours the temperature of 
the water will be considerably higher. Lampblack is a good absorber of 
heat, and it is used as a coating in order that all the light rays 
which fall upon the cylinder may be absorbed and none lost by 
reflection. 

Light and heat rays fall upon the lampblack, pass through the 
cylinder, and heat the water. We know that the red light rays have the 
largest share toward heating the water, because if the cylinder is 
surrounded by blue glass which absorbs the red rays and prevents their 
passage into the water, the temperature of the water begins to fall. 
That the other light rays have a small share would have been clear 
==========
from the preceding Section. 

All the energy of the sunshine which falls upon the cylinder, both as 
heat and as light, is absorbed in the form of heat, and the total 
amount of this energy can be calculated from the increase in the 
temperature of the water. The energy which heated the water would have 
passed onward to the surface of the earth if its path had not been 
obstructed by the cylinder of water; and we can be sure that the 
energy which entered the water and changed its temperature would 
ordinarily have heated an equal area of the earth's surface; and from 
this, we can calculate the energy falling upon the entire surface of 
the earth during any one day. 

Computations based upon this experiment show that the earth receives 
daily from the sun the equivalent of 341,000,000,000 horse power--an 
amount inconceivable to the human mind. 

Professor Young gives a striking picture of what this energy of the 
sun could do. A solid column of ice 93,000,000 miles long and 2-1/4 
miles in diameter could be melted in a single second if the sun could 
concentrate its entire power on the ice. 

While the amount of energy received daily from the sun by the earth is 
actually enormous, it is small in comparison with the whole amount 
given out by the sun to the numerous heavenly bodies which make up the 
universe. In fact, of the entire outflow of heat and light, the earth 
receives only one part in two thousand million, and this is a very 
small portion indeed. 

139. How Light and Heat Travel from the Sun to Us. Astronomers tell 
us that the sun--the chief source of heat and light--is 93,000,000 
miles away from us; that is, so far distant that the fastest express 
train would require about 176 years to reach the sun. How do heat and 
light travel through this vast abyss of space? 

[Illustration: FIG. 90.--Waves formed by a pebble.] 

==========
A quiet pool and a pebble will help to make it clear to us. If we 
throw a pebble into a quiet pool (Fig. 90), waves or ripples form and 
spread out in all directions, gradually dying out as they become more 
and more distant from the pebble. It is a strange fact that while we 
see the ripple moving farther and farther away, the particles of water 
are themselves not moving outward and away, but are merely bobbing up 
and down, or are vibrating. If you wish to be sure of this, throw the 
pebble near a spot where a chip lies quiet on the smooth pond. After 
the waves form, the chip rides up and down with the water, but does 
not move outward; if the water itself were moving outward, it would 
carry the chip with it, but the water has no forward motion, and hence 
the chip assumes the only motion possessed by the water, that is, an 
up-and-down motion. Perhaps a more simple illustration is the 
appearance of a wheat field or a lawn on a windy day; the wind sweeps 
over the grass, producing in the grass a wave like the water waves of 
the ocean, but the blades of grass do not move from their accustomed 
place in the ground, held fast as they are by their roots. 

If a pebble is thrown into a quiet pool, it creates ripples or waves 
which spread outward in all directions, but which soon die out, 
leaving the pool again placid and undisturbed. If now we could quickly 
withdraw the pebble from the pool, the water would again be disturbed 
and waves would form. If the pebble were attached to a string so that 
it could be dropped into the water and withdrawn at regular intervals, 
the waves would never have a chance to disappear, because there would 
always be a regularly timed definite disturbance of the water. Learned 
men tell us that all hot bodies and all luminous bodies are composed 
of tiny particles, called molecules, which move unceasingly back and 
forth with great speed. In Section 95 we saw that the molecules of all 
substances move unceasingly; their speed, however, is not so great, 
nor are their motions so regularly timed as are those of the 
heat-giving and the light-giving particles. As the particles of the 
hot and luminous bodies vibrate with great speed and force they 
violently disturb the medium around them, and produce a series of 
waves similar to those produced in the water by the pebble. If, 
however, a pebble is thrown into the water very gently, the 
disturbance is slight, sometimes too slight to throw the water into 
waves; in the same way objects whose molecules are in a state of 
gentle motion do not produce light. 

The particles of heat-giving and light-giving bodies are in a state of 
rapid vibration, and thereby disturb the surrounding medium, which 
transmits or conveys the disturbance to the earth or to other objects 
==========
by a train of waves. When these waves reach their destination, the 
sensation of light or heat is produced. 

We see the water waves, but we can never see with the eye the heat and 
light waves which roll in to us from that far-distant source, the sun. 
We can be sure of them only through their effect on our bodies, and by 
the visible work they do. 

140. How Heat and Light Differ. If heat and light are alike due to 
the regular, rapid motion of the particles of a body, and are 
similarly conveyed by waves, how is it, then, that heat and light are 
apparently so different? 

Light and heat differ as much as the short, choppy waves of the ocean 
and the slow, long swell of the ocean, but not more so. The sailor 
handles his boat in one way in a choppy sea and in a different way in 
a rolling sea, for he knows that these two kinds of waves act 
dissimilarly. The long, slow swell of the ocean would correspond with 
the longer, slower waves which travel out from the sun, and which on 
reaching us are interpreted as heat. The shorter, more frequent waves 
of the ocean would typify the short, rapid waves which leave the sun, 
and which on reaching us are interpreted as light. 




CHAPTER XV 

ARTIFICIAL LIGHTING 


141. We seldom consider what life would be without our wonderful 
==========
methods of illumination which turn night into day, and prolong the 
hours of work and pleasure. Yet it was not until the nineteenth 
century that the marvelous change was made from the short-lived candle 
to the more enduring oil lamp. Before the coming of the lamp, even in 
large cities like Paris, the only artificial light to guide the 
belated traveler at night was the candle required to be kept burning 
in an occasional window. 

With the invention of the kerosene lamp came more efficient lighting 
of home and street, and with the advent of gas and electricity came a 
light so effective that the hours of business, manufacture, and 
pleasure could be extended far beyond the setting of the sun. 

The production of light by candle, oil, and gas will be considered in 
the following paragraphs, while illumination by electricity will be 
reserved for a later Chapter. 

142. The Candle. Candles were originally made by dipping a wick into 
melting tallow, withdrawing it, allowing the adhered tallow to harden, 
and repeating the dipping until a satisfactory thickness was obtained. 
The more modern method consists in pouring a fatty preparation into a 
mold, at the center of which a wick has been placed. 

The wick, when lighted, burns for a brief interval with a faint, 
uncertain light; almost immediately, however, the intensity of the 
light increases and the illumination remains good as long as the 
==========
candle lasts. The heat of the burning tallow melts more of the tallow 
near it, and this liquid fat is quickly sucked up into the burning 
wick. The heat of the flame is sufficient to change most of this 
liquid into a gas, that is, to vaporize the liquid, and furthermore to 
set fire to the gas thus formed. These heated gases burn with a bright 
yellow flame. 

143. The Oil Lamp. The simple candle of our ancestors was now 
replaced by the oil lamp, which gave a brighter, steadier, and more 
permanent illumination. The principle of the lamp is similar to that 
of the candle, except that the wick is saturated with kerosene or oil 
rather than with fat. The heat from the burning wick is sufficient to 
change the oil into a gas and then to set fire to the gas. By placing 
a chimney over the burning wick, a constant and uniform draught of air 
is maintained around the blazing gases, and hence a steady, 
unflickering light is obtained. Gases and carbon particles are set 
free by the burning wick. In order that the gases may burn and the 
solid particle glow, a plentiful supply of oxygen is necessary. If the 
quantity of air is insufficient, the carbon particles remain unburned 
and form soot. A lamp "smokes" when the air which reaches the wick is 
insufficient to burn the rapidly formed carbon particles; this 
explains the danger of turning a lamp wick too high and producing more 
carbon particles than can be oxidized by the air admitted through the 
lamp chimney. 

One great disadvantage of oil lamps and oil stoves is that they cannot 
be carried safely from place to place. It is almost impossible to 
carry a lamp without spilling the oil. The flame soon spreads from the 
wick to the overflowing oil and in consequence the lamp blazes and an 
explosion may result. Candles, on the other hand, are safe from 
explosion; the dripping grease is unpleasant but not dangerous. 

The illumination from a shaded oil lamp is soft and agreeable, but the 
trimming of the wicks, the refilling of bowls, and the cleaning of 
chimneys require time and labor. For this reason, the introduction of 
==========
gas met with widespread success. The illumination from an ordinary gas 
jet is stronger than that from an ordinary lamp, and the stronger 
illumination added to the greater convenience has made gas a very 
popular source of light. 

144. Gas Burners and Gas Mantles. For a long time, the only gas 
flame used was that in which the luminosity resulted in heating 
particles of carbon to incandescence. Recently, however, that has been 
widely replaced by use of a Bunsen flame upon an incandescent mantle, 
such as the Welsbach. The principle of the incandescent mantle is very 
simple. When certain substances, such as thorium and cerium, are 
heated, they do not melt or vaporize, but glow with an intense bright 
light. Welsbach made use of this fact to secure a burner in which the 
illumination depends upon the glowing of an incandescent, solid 
mantle, rather than upon the blazing of a burning gas. He made a 
cylindrical mantle of thin fabric, and then soaked it in a solution of 
thorium and cerium until it became saturated with the chemical. The 
mantle thus impregnated with thorium and cerium is placed on the gas 
jet, but before the gas is turned on, a lighted match is held to the 
mantle in order to burn away the thin fabric. After the fabric has 
been burned away, there remains a coarse gauze mantle of the desired 
chemicals. If now the gas cock is opened, the escaping gas is ignited, 
the heat of the flame will raise the mantle to incandescence and will 
produce a brilliant light. A very small amount of burning gas is 
sufficient to raise the mantle to incandescence, and hence, by the use 
of a mantle, intense light is secured at little cost. The mantle saves 
us gas, because the cock is usually "turned on full" whether we use a 
plain burner or a mantle burner. But, nevertheless, gas is saved, 
because when the mantle is adjusted to the gas jet, the pressure of 
the gas is lessened by a mechanical device and hence less gas escapes 
and burns. By actual experiment, it has been found that an ordinary 
burner consumes about five times as much gas per candle power as the 
best incandescent burner, and hence is about five times as expensive. 
One objection to the mantles is their tendency to break. But if the 
mantles are carefully adjusted on the burner and are not roughly 
jarred in use, they last many months; and since the best quality cost 
only twenty-five cents, the expense of renewing the mantles is slight. 

145. Gas for Cooking. If a cold object is held in the bright flame 
of an ordinary gas jet, it becomes covered with soot, or particles of 
unburned carbon. Although the flame is surrounded by air, the central 
portion of it does not receive sufficient oxygen to burn up the 
numerous carbon particles constantly thrown off by the burning gas, 
and hence many carbon particles remain in the flame as glowing, 
incandescent masses. That some unburned carbon is present in a flame 
is shown by the fact that whenever a cold object is held in the flame, 
it becomes "smoked" or covered with soot. If enough air were supplied 
to the flame to burn up the carbon as fast as it was set free, there 
would be no deposition of soot on objects held over the flame or in 
it, because the carbon would be transformed into gaseous matter. 

Unburned carbon would be objectionable in cooking stoves where 
utensils are constantly in contact with the flame, and for this reason 
cooking stoves are provided with an arrangement by means of which 
additional air is supplied to the burning gas in quantities adequate 
to insure complete combustion of the rapidly formed carbon particles. 
An opening is made in the tube through which gas passes to the burner, 
and as the gas moves past this opening, it carries with it a draft of 
air. These openings are visible on all gas stoves, and should be kept 
clean and free of clogging, in order to insure complete combustion. So 
long as the supply of air is sufficient, the flame burns with a dull 
blue color, but when the supply falls below that needed for complete 
burning of the carbon, the blue color disappears, and a yellow flame 
takes its place, and with the yellow flame the deposition of soot is 
==========
inevitable. 

146. By-products of Coal Gas. Many important products besides 
illuminating gas are obtained from the distillation of soft coal. 
Ammonia is made from the liquids which collect in the condensers; 
anilin, the source of exquisite dyes, is made from the thick, tarry 
distillate, and coke is the residue left in the clay retorts. The coal 
tar yields not only anilin, but also carbolic acid and naphthalene, 
both of which are commercially valuable, the former as a widely used 
disinfectant, and the latter as a popular moth preventive. 

From a ton of good gas-producing coal can be obtained about 10,000 
cubic feet of illuminating gas, and as by-products 6 pounds of 
ammonia, 12 gallons of coal tar, and 1300 pounds of coke. 

147. Natural Gas. Animal and vegetable matter buried in the depth of 
the earth sometimes undergoes natural distillation, and as a result 
gas is formed. The gas produced in this way is called natural gas. It 
is a cheap source of illumination, but is found in relatively few 
localities and only in limited quantity. 

148. Acetylene. In 1892 it was discovered that lime and coal fused 
==========
together in the intense heat of the electric furnace formed a 
crystalline, metallic-looking substance called calcium carbide. As a 
result of that discovery, this substance was soon made on a large 
scale and sold at a moderate price. The cheapness of calcium carbide 
has made it possible for the isolated farmhouse to discard oil lamps 
and to have a private gas system. When the hard, gray crystals of 
calcium carbide are put in water, they give off acetylene, a colorless 
gas which burns with a brilliant white flame. If bits of calcium 
carbide are dropped into a test tube containing water, bubbles of gas 
will be seen to form and escape into the air, and the escaping gas may 
be ignited by a burning match held near the mouth of the test tube. 
When chemical action between the water and carbide has ceased, and gas 
bubbles have stopped forming, slaked lime is all that is left of the 
dark gray crystals which were put into the water. 

When calcium carbide is used as a source of illumination, the crystals 
are mechanically dropped into a tank containing water, and the gas 
generated is automatically collected in a small sliding tank, whence 
it passes through pipes to the various rooms. The slaked lime, formed 
while the gas was generated, collects at the bottom of the tanks and 
is removed from time to time. 

The cost of an acetylene generator is about $50 for a small house, and 
the cost of maintenance is not more than that of lamps. The generator 
does not require filling oftener than once a week, and the labor is 
less than that required for oil lamps. In a house in which there were 
twenty burners, the tanks were filled with water and carbide but once 
a fortnight. Acetylene is seldom used in large cities, but it is very 
widely used in small communities and is particularly convenient in 
more or less remote summer residences. 

Electric Lights. The most recent and the most convenient lighting is 
that obtained by electricity. A fine, hairlike filament within a glass 
bulb is raised to incandescence by the heat of an electric current. 
This form of illumination will be considered in connection with 
==========
electricity. 




CHAPTER XVI 

MAN'S WAY OF HELPING HIMSELF 


149. Labor-saving Devices. To primitive man belonged more especially 
the arduous tasks of the out-of-door life: the clearing of paths 
through the wilderness; the hauling of material; the breaking up of 
the hard soil of barren fields into soft loam ready to receive the 
seed; the harvesting of the ripe grain, etc. 

[Illustration: FIG. 91.--Prying a stone out of the ground.] 

The more intelligent races among men soon learned to help themselves 
in these tasks. For example, our ancestors in the field soon learned 
to pry stones out of the ground (Fig. 91) rather than to undertake the 
almost impossible task of lifting them out of the earth in which they 
were embedded; to swing fallen trees away from a path by means of rope 
attached to one end rather than to attempt to remove them 
single-handed; to pitch hay rather than to lift it; to clear a field 
==========
with a rake rather than with the hands; to carry heavy loads in 
wheelbarrows (Fig. 92) rather than on the shoulders; to roll barrels 
up a plank (Fig. 93) and to raise weights by ropes. In every case, 
whether in the lifting of stones, or the felling of trees, or the 
transportation of heavy weights, or the digging of the ground, man 
used his brain in the invention of mechanical devices which would 
relieve muscular strain and lighten physical labor. 

If all mankind had depended upon physical strength only, the world 
to-day would be in the condition prevalent in parts of Africa, Asia, 
and South America, where the natives loosen the soil with their hands 
or with crude implements (Fig. 94), and transport huge weights on 
their shoulders and heads. 

[Illustration: FIG. 92.--The wheelbarrow lightens labor.] 

Any mechanical device (Figs. 95 and 96), whereby man's work can be 
more conveniently done, is called a machine; the machine itself never 
does any work--it merely enables man to use his own efforts to better 
advantage. 

[Illustration: FIG. 93.--Rolling barrels up a plank.] 

150. When do we Work? Whenever, as a result of effort or force, an 
==========
object is moved, work is done. If you lift a knapsack from the floor 
to the table, you do work because you use force and move the knapsack 
through a distance equal to the height of the table. If the knapsack 
were twice as heavy, you would exert twice as much force to raise it 
to the same height, and hence you would do double the work. If you 
raised the knapsack twice the distance,--say to your shoulders 
instead of to the level of the table,--you would do twice the work, 
because while you would exert the same force you would continue it 
through double the distance. 

[Illustration: FIG. 94.--Crude method of farming.] 

Lifting heavy weights through great distances is not the only way in 
which work is done. Painting, chopping wood, hammering, plowing, 
washing, scrubbing, sewing, are all forms of work. In painting, the 
moving brush spreads paint over a surface; in chopping wood, the 
descending ax cleaves the wood asunder; in scrubbing, the wet mop 
rubbed over the floor carries dirt away; in every conceivable form of 
work, force and motion occur. 

A man does work when he walks, a woman does work when she rocks in a 
chair--although here the work is less than in walking. On a windy day 
the work done in walking is greater than normal. The wind resists our 
progress, and we must exert more force in order to cover the same 
distance. Walking through a plowed or rough field is much more tiring 
than to walk on a smooth road, because, while the distance covered may 
be the same, the effort put forth is greater, and hence more work is 
done. Always the greater the resistance encountered, the greater the 
force required, and hence the greater the work done. 

The work done by a boy who raises a 5-pound knapsack to his shoulder 
would be 5x4, or 20, providing his shoulders were 4 feet from the 
ground. 

The amount of work done depends upon the force used and the distance 
covered (sometimes called displacement), and hence we can say that 

Work = force multiplied by distance, 
==========
or _W = f ? d_. 

151. Machines. A glance into our machine shops, our factories, and 
even our homes shows how widespread is the use of complex machinery. 
But all machines, however complicated in appearance, are in reality 
but modifications and combinations of one or more of four simple 
machines devised long ago by our remote ancestors. These simple 
devices are known to-day, as (1) the lever, represented by a crowbar, 
a pitchfork; (2) the inclined plane, represented by the plank upon 
which barrels are rolled into a wagon; (3) the pulley, represented by 
almost any contrivance for the raising of furniture to upper stories; 
(4) the wheel and axle, represented by cogwheels and coffee grinders. 

[Illustration: FIG. 95.--Primitive method of grinding corn.] 

Suppose a 600-pound bowlder which is embedded in the ground is needed 
for the tower of a building. The problem of the builder is to get the 
heavy bowlder out of the ground, to load it on a wagon for 
transportation, and finally to raise it to the tower. Obviously, he 
cannot do this alone; the greatest amount of force of which he is 
capable would not suffice to accomplish any one of these tasks. How 
then does he help himself and perform the impossible? Simply, by the 
use of some of the machine types mentioned above, illustrations of 
which are known in a general way to every schoolboy. The very knife 
with which a stick is whittled is a machine. 

[Illustration: FIG. 96.--Separating rice grains by flailing.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 97.--The principle of the lever.] 

==========
152. The Lever. Balance a foot rule, containing a hole at its middle 
point _F_, as shown in Figure 97. If now a weight of 1 pound is 
suspended from the bar at some point, say 12, the balance is 
disturbed, and the bar swings about the point _F_ as a center. The 
balance can be regained by suspending an equivalent weight at the 
opposite end of the bar, or by applying a 2-pound weight at a point 3 
inches to the left of _F_. In the latter case a force of 1 pound 
actually balances a force of 2 pounds, but the 1-pound weight is twice 
as far from the point of suspension as is the 2-pound weight. The 
small weight makes up in distance what it lacks in magnitude. 

Such an arrangement of a rod or bar is called a lever. In any form of 
lever there are only three things to be considered: the point where 
the weight rests, the point where the force acts, and the point called 
the fulcrum about which the rod rotates. 

The distance from the force to the fulcrum is called the force arm. 
The distance from the weight to the fulcrum is called the weight arm; 
and it is a law of levers, as well as of all other machines, that the 
force multiplied by the length of the force arm must equal the weight 
multiplied by the length of the weight arm. 

Force ? force arm = weight ? weight arm. 

A force of 1 pound at a distance of 6, or with a force arm 6, will 
balance a weight of 2 pounds with a weight arm 3; that is, 

1 ? 6 = 2 ? 3. 

Similarly a force of 10 pounds may be made to sustain a weight of 100 
pounds, providing the force arm is 10 times longer than the weight 
arm; and a force arm of 800 pounds, at a distance of 10 feet from the 
fulcrum, may be made to sustain a weight of 8000 pounds, providing the 
weight is 1 foot from the fulcrum. 

153. Applications of the Lever. By means of a lever, a 600-pound 
bowlder can be easily pried out of the ground. Let the lever, any 
strong metal bar, be supported on a stone which serves as fulcrum; 
then if a man exerts his force at the end of the rod somewhat as in 
Figure 91 (p. 154), the force arm will be the distance from the stone 
or fulcrum to the end of the bar, and the weight arm will be the 
distance from the fulcrum to the bowlder itself. The man pushes down 
with a force of 100 pounds, but with that amount succeeds in prying up 
the 600-pound bowlder. If, however, you look carefully, you will see 
that the force arm is 6 times as long as the weight arm, so that the 
smaller force is compensated for by the greater distance through which 
it acts. 

At first sight it seems as though the man's work were done for him by 
the machine. But this is not so. The man must lower his end of the 
lever 3 feet in order to raise the bowlder 6 inches out of the ground. 
He does not at any time exert a large force, but he accomplishes his 
purpose by exerting a small force continuously through a 
correspondingly greater distance. He finds it easier to exert a force 
of 100 pounds continuously until his end has moved 3 feet rather than 
to exert a force of 600 pounds on the bowlder and move it 6 inches. 

By the time the stone has been raised the man has done as much work as 
though the stone had been raised directly, but his inability to put 
forth sufficient muscular force to raise the bowlder directly would 
have rendered impossible a result which was easily accomplished when 
through the medium of the lever he could extend his small force 
through greater distance. 

154. The Wheelbarrow as a Lever. The principle of the lever is 
always the same; but the relative position of the important points may 
vary. For example, the fulcrum is sometimes at one end, the force at 
the opposite end, and the weight to be lifted between them. 

[Illustration: FIG. 98.--A slightly different form of lever.] 

Suspend a stick with a hole at its center as in Figure 98, and hang a 
4-pound weight at a distance of 1 foot from the fulcrum, supporting 
the load by means of a spring balance 2 feet from the fulcrum. The 
pointer on the spring balance shows that the force required to balance 
the 4-pound load is but 2 pounds. 

The force is 2 feet from the fulcrum, and the weight (4) is 1 foot 
from the fulcrum, so that 

Force ? distance = Weight ? distance, 
or 2 ? 2 = 4 ? 1. 

Move the 4-pound weight so that it is very near the fulcrum, say but 6 
inches from it; then the spring balance registers a force only one 
fourth as great as the weight which it suspends. In other words a 
force of 1 at a distance of 24 inches (2 feet) is equivalent to a 
force of 4 at a distance of 6 inches. 

==========
==========

[Illustration: FIG. 99.--The wheelbarrow lightened labor.] 

One of the most useful levers of this type is the wheelbarrow (Fig. 
99). The fulcrum is at the wheel, the force is at the handles, the 
weight is on the wheelbarrow. If the load is halfway from the fulcrum 
to the man's hands, the man will have to lift with a force equal to 
one half the load. If the load is one fourth as far from the fulcrum 
as the man's hands, he will need to lift with a force only one fourth 
as great as that of the load. 

[Illustration: FIG. 100.--A modified wheelbarrow.] 

This shows that in loading a wheelbarrow, it is important to arrange 
the load as near to the wheel as possible. 

[Illustration: FIG. 101.--The nutcracker is a lever.] 

The nutcracker (Fig. 101) is an illustration of a double lever of the 
wheelbarrow kind; the nearer the nut is to the fulcrum, the easier the 
cracking. 

[Illustration: FIG. 102.--The hand exerts a small force over a long 
distance and draws out a nail.] 

Hammers (Fig. 102), tack-lifters, scissors, forceps, are important 
levers, and if you will notice how many different levers (fig. 103) 
are used by all classes of men, you will understand how valuable a 
machine this simple device is. 

==========
155. The Inclined Plane. A man wishes to load the 600-pound bowlder 
on a wagon, and proceeds to do it by means of a plank, as in Figure 
93. Such an arrangement is called an inclined plane. 

The advantage of an inclined plane can be seen by the following 
experiment. Select a smooth board 4 feet long and prop it so that the 
end _A_ (Fig. 104) is 1 foot above the level of the table; the length 
of the incline is then 4 times as great as its height. Fasten a metal 
roller to a spring balance and observe its weight. Then pull the 
roller uniformly upward along the plank and notice what the pull is on 
the balance, being careful always to hold the balance parallel to the 
incline. 

When the roller is raised along the incline, the balance registers a 
pull only one fourth as great as the actual weight of the roller. That 
is, when the roller weighs 12, a force of 3 suffices to raise it to 
the height _A_ along the incline; but the smaller force must be 
applied throughout the entire length of the incline. In many cases, it 
is preferable to exert a force of 30 pounds, for example, over the 
distance _CA_ than a force of 120 pounds over the shorter distance 
_BA_. 

[Illustration: FIG. 103.--Primitive man tried to lighten his task by 
balancing his burden.] 

Prop the board so that the end _A_ is 2 feet above the table level; 
that is, arrange the inclined plane in such a way that its length is 
twice as great as its height. In that case the steady pull on the 
balance will be one half the weight of the roller; or a force of 6 
pounds will suffice to raise the 12-pound roller. 

[Illustration: FIG. 104.--Less force is required to raise the roller 
along the incline than to raise it to _A_ directly.] 

The steeper the incline, the more force necessary to raise a weight; 
whereas if the incline is small, the necessary lifting force is 
greatly reduced. On an inclined plane whose length is ten times its 
height, the lifting force is reduced to one tenth the weight of the 
load. The advantage of an incline depends upon the relative length and 
height, or is equal to the ratio of the length to the height. 

156. Application. By the use of an inclined plank a strong man can 
load the 600-pound bowlder on a wagon. Suppose the floor of the wagon 
is 2 feet above the ground, then if a 6-foot plank is used, 200 pounds 
of force will suffice to raise the bowlder; but the man will have to 
push with this force against the bowlder while it moves over the 
entire length of the plank. 

Since work is equal to force multiplied by distance, the man has done 
work represented by 200 ?? 6, or 1200. This is exactly the amount of 
work which would have been necessary to raise the bowlder directly. A 
man of even enormous strength could not lift such a weight (600 lb.) 
even an inch directly, but a strong man can furnish the smaller force 
(200) over a distance of 6 feet; hence, while the machine does not 
lessen the total amount of work required of a man, it creates a new 
distribution of work and makes possible, and even easy, results which 
otherwise would be impossible by human agency. 

157. Railroads and Highways. The problem of the incline is an 
important one to engineers who have under their direction the 
construction of our highways and the laying of our railroad tracks. It 
requires tremendous force to pull a load up grade, and most of us are 
==========
familiar with the struggling horse and the puffing locomotive. For 
this reason engineers, wherever possible, level down the steep places, 
and reduce the strain as far as possible. 

[Illustration: FIG. 105.--A well-graded railroad bed.] 

The slope of the road is called its grade, and the grade itself is 
simply the number of feet the hill rises per mile. A road a mile long 
(5280 feet) has a grade of 132 if the crest of the hill is 132 feet 
above the level at which the road started. 

[Illustration: FIG. 106.--A long, gradual ascent is better than a 
shorter, steeper one.] 

In such an incline, the ratio of length to height is 5280 ?? 132, or 
40; and hence in order to pull a train of cars to the summit, the 
engine would need to exert a continuous pull equal to one fortieth of 
the combined weight of the train. 

If, on the other hand, the ascent had been gradual, so that the grade 
was 66 feet per mile, a pull from the engine of one eightieth of the 
combined weight would have sufficed to land the train of cars at the 
crest of the grade. 

Because of these facts, engineers spend great sums in grading down 
railroad beds, making them as nearly level as possible. In mountainous 
regions, the topography of the land prevents the elimination of all 
steep grades, but nevertheless the attempt is always made to follow 
==========
the easiest grades. 

158. The Wedge. If an inclined plane is pushed underneath or within 
an object, it serves as a wedge. Usually a wedge consists of two 
inclined planes (Fig. 107). 

[Illustration: FIG. 107.--By means of a wedge, the stump is split.] 

A chisel and an ax are illustrations of wedges. Perhaps the most 
universal form of a wedge is our common pin. Can you explain how this 
is a wedge? 

159. The Screw. Another valuable and indispensable form of the 
inclined plane is the screw. This consists of a metal rod around which 
passes a ridge, and Figure 108 shows clearly that a screw is simply a 
rod around which (in effect) an inclined plane has been wrapped. 

[Illustration: FIG. 108--A screw as a simple machine.] 

The ridge encircling the screw is called the thread, and the distance 
between two successive threads is called the pitch. It is easy to see 
that the closer the threads and the smaller the pitch, the greater the 
advantage of the screw, and hence the less force needed in overcoming 
resistance. A corkscrew is a familiar illustration of the screw. 

160. Pulleys. The pulley, another of the machines, is merely a 
==========
grooved wheel around which a cord passes. It is sometimes more 
convenient to move a load in one direction rather than in another, and 
the pulley in its simplest form enables us to do this. In order to 
raise a flag to the top of a mast, it is not necessary to climb the 
mast, and so pull up the flag; the same result is accomplished much 
more easily by attaching the flag to a movable string, somewhat as in 
Figure 109, and pulling from below. As the string is pulled down, the 
flag rises and ultimately reaches the desired position. 

If we employ a stationary pulley, as in Figure 109, we do not change 
the force, because the force required to balance the load is as large 
as the load itself. The only advantage is that a force in one 
direction may be used to produce motion in another direction. Such a 
pulley is known as a fixed pulley. 

[Illustration: FIG. 109.--By means of a pulley, a force in one 
direction produces motion in the opposite direction.] 

161. Movable Pulleys. By the use of a movable pulley, we are able to 
support a weight by a force equal to only one half the load. In Figure 
109, the downward pull of the weight and the downward pull of the hand 
are equal; in Figure 110, the spring balance supports only one half 
the entire load, the remaining half being borne by the hook to which 
the string is attached. The weight is divided equally between the two 
parts of the string which passes around the pulley, so that each 
strand bears only one half of the burden. 

We have seen in our study of the lever and the inclined plane that an 
increase in force is always accompanied by a decrease in distance, and 
in the case of the pulley we naturally look for a similar result. If 
you raise the balance (Fig. 110) 12 feet, you will find that the 
weight rises only 6 feet; if you raise the balance 24 inches, you will 
find that the weight rises 12 inches. You must exercise a force of 
100 pounds over 12 feet of space in order to raise a weight of 200 
pounds a distance of 6 feet. When we raise 100 pounds through 12 feet 
or 200 pounds through 6 feet the total work done is the same; but the 
pulley enables those who cannot furnish a force of 200 pounds for the 
space of 6 feet to accomplish the task by furnishing 100 pounds for 
the space of 12 feet. 

[Illustration: FIG. 110.--A movable pulley lightens labor.] 

162. Combination of Pulleys. A combination of pulleys called block 
and tackle is used where very heavy loads are to be moved. In Figure 
111 the upper block of pulleys is fixed, the lower block is movable, 
and one continuous rope passes around the various pulleys. The load is 
supported by 6 strands, and each strand bears one sixth of the load. 
If the hand pulls with a force of 1 pound at _P_, it can raise a load 
of 6 pounds at _W_, but the hand will have to pull downward 6 feet at 
_P_ in order to raise the load at _W_ 1 foot. If 8 pulleys were used, 
a force equivalent to one eighth of the load would suffice to move 
_W_, but this force would have to be exerted over a distance 8 times 
as great as that through which _W_ was raised. 

[Illustration: FIG. 111.--An effective arrangement of pulleys known as 
block and tackle.] 

163. Practical Application. In our childhood many of us saw with 
wonder the appearance and disappearance of flags flying at the tops 
of high masts, but observation soon taught us that the flags were 
raised by pulleys. In tenements, where there is no yard for the family 
washing, clothes often appear flapping in mid-air. This seems most 
marvelous until we learn that the lines are pulled back and forth by 
pulleys at the window and at a distant support. By means of pulleys, 
awnings are raised and lowered, and the use of pulleys by furniture 
movers, etc., is familiar to every wide-awake observer on the streets. 

==========
164. Wheel and Axle. The wheel and axle consists of a large wheel 
and a small axle so fastened that they rotate together. 

[Illustration: FIG. 112.--The wheel and axle.] 

When the large wheel makes one revolution, _P_ falls a distance equal 
to the circumference of the wheel. While _P_ moves downward, _W_ 
likewise moves, but its motion is upward, and the distance it moves is 
small, being equal only to the circumference of the small axle. But a 
small force at _P_ will sustain a larger force at _W_; if the 
circumference of the large wheel is 40 inches, and that of the small 
wheel 10 inches, a load of 100 at _W_ can be sustained by a force of 
25 at _P_. The increase in force of the wheel and axle depends upon 
the relative size of the two parts, that is, upon the circumference of 
wheel as compared with circumference of axle, and since the ratio 
between circumference and radius is constant, the ratio of the wheel 
and axle combination is the ratio of the long radius to the short 
radius. 

For example, in a wheel and axle of radii 20 and 4, respectively, a 
given weight at _P_ would balance 5 times as great a load at _W_. 

165. Application. _Windlass, Cogwheels._ In the old-fashioned 
windlass used in farming districts, the large wheel is replaced by a 
handle which, when turned, describes a circle. Such an arrangement is 
equivalent to wheel and axle (Fig. 112); the capstan used on shipboard 
for raising the anchor has the same principle. The kitchen coffee 
grinder and the meat chopper are other familiar illustrations. 

Cogwheels are modifications of the wheel and axle. Teeth cut in _A_ 
fit into similar teeth cut in _B_, and hence rotation of _A_ causes 
rotation of _B_. Several revolutions of the smaller wheel, however, 
are necessary in order to turn the larger wheel through one complete 
revolution; if the radius of _A_ is one half that of _B_, two 
revolutions of _A_ will correspond to one of _B_; if the radius of _A_ 
is one third that of _B_, three revolutions of _A_ will correspond to 
one of _B_. 

[Illustration: FIG. 113.--Cogwheels.] 

Experiment demonstrates that a weight _W_ attached to a cogwheel of 
radius 3 can be raised by a force _P_, equal to one third of _W_ 
applied to a cogwheel of radius 1. There is thus a great increase in 
force. But the speed with which _W_ is raised is only one third the 
speed with which the small wheel rotates, or increase in power has 
been at the decrease of speed. 

This is a very common method for raising heavy weights by small force. 

Cogwheels can be made to give speed at the decrease of force. A heavy 
weight _W_ attached to _B_ will in its slow fall cause rapid rotation 
of _A_, and hence rapid rise of _P_. It is true that _P_, the load 
raised, will be less than _W_, the force exerted, but if speed is our 
aim, this machine serves our purpose admirably. 

An extremely important form of wheel and axle is that in which the two 
wheels are connected by belts as in Figure 114. Rotation of _W_ 
induces rotation of _w_, and a small force at _W_ is able to overcome 
a large force at _w_. An advantage of the belt connection is that 
==========
power at one place can be transmitted over a considerable distance and 
utilized in another place. 

[Illustration: FIG. 114.--By means of a belt, motion can be 
transferred from place to place.] 

166. Compound Machines. Out of the few simple machines mentioned in 
the preceding Sections has developed the complex machinery of to-day. 
By a combination of screw and lever, for example, we obtain the 
advantage due to each device, and some compound machines have been 
made which combine all the various kinds of simple machines, and in 
this way multiply their mechanical advantage many fold. 

A relatively simple complex machine called the crane (Fig. 116) maybe 
seen almost any day on the street, or wherever heavy weights are being 
lifted. It is clear that a force applied to turn wheel 1 causes a 
slower rotation of wheel 3, and a still slower rotation of wheel 4, 
but as 4 rotates it winds up a chain and slowly raises _Q_. A very 
complex machine is that seen in Figure 117. 

[Illustration: FIG. 115.--A simple derrick for raising weights.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 116.--A traveling crane.] 

167. Measurement of Work. In Section 150, we learned that the amount 
of work done depends upon the force exerted, and the distance 
covered, or that _W_ = force ?? distance. A man who raises 5 pounds a 
height of 5 feet does far more work than a man who raises 5 ounces a 
height of 5 inches, but the product of force by distance is 25 in each 
case. There is difficulty because we have not selected an arbitrary 
unit of work. The unit of work chosen and in use in practical affairs 
is the foot pound, and is defined as the work done when a force of 1 
pound acts through a distance of 1 foot. A man who moves 8 pounds 
through 6 feet does 48 foot pounds of work, while a man who moves 8 
==========
ounces (1/2 pound) through 6 inches (1/2 foot) does only one fourth of 
a foot pound of work. 

[Illustration: FIG. 117.--A farm engine putting in a crop.] 

168. The Power or the Speed with which Work is Done. A man can load 
a wagon more quickly than a growing boy. The work done by the one is 
equal to the work done by the other, but the man is more powerful, 
because the time required for a given task is very important. An 
engine which hoists a 50-pound weight in 1 second is much more 
powerful than a man who requires 50 seconds for the same task; hence 
in estimating the value of a working agent, whether animal or 
mechanical, we must consider not only the work done, but the speed 
with which it is done. 

The rate at which a machine is able to accomplish a unit of work is 
called _power_, and the unit of power customarily used is the horse 
power. Any power which can do 550 foot pounds of work per second is 
said to be one horse power (H.P.). This unit was chosen by James Watt, 
the inventor of a steam engine, when he was in need of a unit with 
which to compare the new source of power, the engine, with his old 
source of power, the horse. Although called a horse power it is 
greater than the power of an average horse. 

An ordinary man can do one sixth of a horse power. The average 
locomotive of a railroad has more than 500 H.P., while the engines of 
an ocean liner may have as high as 70,000 H.P. 

169. Waste Work and Efficient Work. In our study of machines we 
omitted a factor which in practical cases cannot be ignored, namely, 
friction. No surface can be made perfectly smooth, and when a barrel 
rolls over an incline, or a rope passes over a pulley, or a cogwheel 
turns its neighbor, there is rubbing and slipping and sliding. Motion 
is thus hindered, and the effective value of the acting force is 
lessened. In order to secure the desired result it is necessary to 
apply a force in excess of that calculated. This extra force, which 
must be supplied if friction is to be counteracted, is in reality 
waste work. 

If the force required by a machine is 150 pounds, while that 
calculated as necessary is 100 pounds, the loss due to friction is 50 
pounds, and the machine, instead of being thoroughly efficient, is 
only two thirds efficient. 

Machinists make every effort to eliminate from a machine the waste due 
to friction, leveling and grinding to the most perfect smoothness and 
adjustment every part of the machine. When the machine is in use, 
friction may be further reduced by the use of lubricating oil. 
Friction can never be totally eliminated, however, and machines of 
even the finest construction lose by friction some of their 
efficiency, while poorly constructed ones lose by friction as much as 
==========
one half of their efficiency. 

170. Man's Strength not Sufficient for Machines. A machine, an inert 
mass of metal and wood, cannot of itself do any work, but can only 
distribute the energy which is brought to it. Fortunately it is not 
necessary that this energy should be contributed by man alone, because 
the store of energy possessed by him is very small in comparison with 
the energy required to run locomotives, automobiles, sawmills, etc. 
Perhaps the greatest value of machines lies in the fact that they 
enable man to perform work by the use of energy other than his own. 

[Illustration: FIG. 118.--Man's strength is not sufficient for heavy 
work.] 

Figure 118 shows one way in which a horse's energy can be utilized in 
lifting heavy loads. Even the fleeting wind has been harnessed by man, 
and, as in the windmill, made to work for him (Fig. 119). One sees 
dotted over the country windmills large and small, and in Holland, the 
country of windmills, the landowner who does not possess a windmill is 
poor indeed. 

For generations running water from rivers, streams, and falls has 
served man by carrying his logs downstream, by turning the wheels of 
his mill, etc.; and in our own day running water is used as an 
indirect source of electric lights for street and house, the energy of 
the falling water serving to rotate the armature of a dynamo (Section 
310). 

[Illustration: FIG. 119.--The windmill pumps water into the troughs 
where cattle drink.] 

A more constant source of energy is that available from the burning of 
fuel, such as coal and oil. The former is the source of energy in 
locomotives, the latter in most automobiles. 

In the following Chapter will be given an account of water, wind, and 
fuel as machine feeders. 




CHAPTER XVII 

THE POWER BEHIND THE ENGINE 


171. Small boys soon learn the power of running water; swimming or 
rowing downstream is easy, while swimming or rowing against the 
current is difficult, and the swifter the water, the easier the one 
and the more difficult the other; the river assists or opposes us as 
==========
we go with it or against it. The water of a quiet pool or of a gentle 
stream cannot do work, but water which is plunging over a precipice or 
dam, or is flowing down steep slopes, may be made to saw wood, grind 
our corn, light our streets, run our electric cars, etc. A waterfall, 
or a rapid stream, is a great asset to any community, and for this 
reason should be carefully guarded. Water power is as great a source 
of wealth as a coal bed or a gold mine. 

The most tremendous waterfall in our country is Niagara Falls, which 
every minute hurls millions of gallons of water down a 163-foot 
precipice. The energy possessed by such an enormous quantity of water 
flowing at such a tremendous speed is almost beyond everyday 
comprehension, and would suffice to run the engines of many cities far 
and near. Numerous attempts to buy from the United States the right to 
utilize some of this apparently wasted energy have been made by 
various commercial companies. It is fortunate that these negotiations 
have been largely fruitless, because much deviation of the water for 
commercial uses and the installation of machinery in the vicinity of 
the famous falls would greatly detract from the beauty of this 
world-known scene, and would rob our country of a natural beauty 
unequaled elsewhere. 

[Illustration: FIG. 120.--A mountain stream turns the wheels of the 
mill.] 

172. Water Wheels. In Figure 120 the water of a small but rapid 
mountain stream is made to rotate a large wheel, which in turn 
communicates its motion through belts to a distant sawmill or grinder. 
In more level regions huge dams are built which hold back the water 
and keep it at a higher level than the wheel; from the dam the water 
is conveyed in pipes (flumes) to the paddle wheel which it turns. 
Cogwheels or belts connect the paddle wheel with the factory 
machinery, so that motion of the paddle wheel insures the running of 
the machinery. 

[Illustration: FIG. 121.--The Pelton water wheel.] 

One of the most efficient forms of water wheels is that shown in 
Figure 121, and called the Pelton wheel. Water issues in a narrow jet 
similar to that of the ordinary garden hose and strikes with great 
force against the lower part of the wheel, thereby causing rotation of 
the wheel. Belts transfer this motion to the machinery of factory or 
mill. 

173. Turbines. The most efficient form of water motor is the 
turbine, a strong metal wheel shaped somewhat like a pin wheel, 
inclosed in a heavy metal case. 

[Illustration: FIG. 122--A turbine at Niagara Falls.] 

Water is conveyed from a reservoir or dam through a pipe (penstock) to 
the turbine case, in which is placed the heavy metal turbine wheel 
(Fig. 122). The force of the water causes rotation of the turbine and 
of the shaft which is rigidly fastened to it. The water which flows 
into the turbine case causes rotation of the wheel, escapes from the 
case through openings, and flows into the tail water. 

The power which a turbine can furnish depends upon the quantity of 
water and the height of the fall, and also upon the turbine wheel 
itself. One of the largest turbines known has a horse power of about 
20,000; that is, it is equivalent, approximately, to 20,000 horses. 

174. How much is a Stream Worth? The work which a stream can perform 
may be easily calculated. Suppose, for example, that 50,000 pounds of 
water fall over a 22-foot dam every second; the power of such a stream 
would be 1,100,000 foot pounds per second or 2000 H.P. Naturally, a 
part of this power would be lost to use by friction within the 
machinery and by leakage, so that the power of a turbine run by a 2000 
H.P. stream would be less than that value. 

Of course, the horse power to be obtained from a stream determines the 
size of the paddle wheel or turbine which can be run by it. It would 
be possible to construct a turbine so large that the stream would not 
suffice to turn the wheel; for this reason, the power of a stream is 
==========
carefully determined before machine construction is begun, and the 
size of the machinery depends upon the estimates of the water power 
furnished by expert engineers. 

A rough estimate of the volume of a stream may be made by the method 
described below:-- 

Suppose we allow a stream of water to flow through a rectangular 
trough; the speed with which the water flows through the trough can be 
determined by noting the time required for a chip to float the length 
of the trough; if the trough is 10 feet long and the time required is 
5 seconds, the water has a velocity of 2 feet per second. 

[Illustration: FIG. 123.--Estimating the quantity of water which flows 
through the trough each second.] 

The quantity of water which flows through the trough each second 
depends upon the dimensions of the trough and the velocity of the 
water. Suppose the trough is 5 feet wide and 3 feet high, or has a 
cross section of 15 square feet. If the velocity of the water were 1 
foot per second, then 15 cubic feet of water would pass any given 
point each second, but since the velocity of the water is 2 feet per 
second, 30 cubic feet will represent the amount of water which will 
flow by a given point in one second. 

175. Quantity of Water Furnished by a River. Drive stakes in the 
river at various places and note the time required for a chip to float 
from one stake to another. If we know the distance between the stakes 
and the time required for the chip to float from one stake to another, 
the velocity of the water can be readily determined. 

The width of the stream from bank to bank is easily measured, and the 
depth is obtained in the ordinary way by sounding; it is necessary to 
take a number of soundings because the bed of the river is by no means 
level, and soundings taken at only one level would not give an 
accurate estimate. If the soundings show the following depths: 30, 25, 
20, 32, 28, the average depth could be taken as 30 + 25 + 20 + 32 + 28 
?? 5, or 27 feet. If, as a result of measuring, the river at a given 
point in its course is found to be 27 feet deep and 60 feet wide, the 
area of a cross section at that spot would be 1620 square feet, and if 
the velocity proved to be 6 feet per second, then the quantity of 
water passing in any one second would be 1620 ?? 6, or 9720 cubic feet. 
By experiment it has been found that 1 cu. ft. of water weighs about 
62.5 lb. The weight of the water passing each second would therefore 
be 62.5 ?? 9720, or 607,500 lb. If this quantity of water plunges over 
a 10-ft. dam, it does 607,500 ?? 10, or 6,075,000 foot pounds of work 
per second, or 11,045 H.P. Such a stream would be very valuable for 
the running of machinery. 

176. Windmills. Those of us who have spent our vacation days in the 
country know that there is no ready-made water supply there as in the 
cities, but that as a rule the farmhouses obtain their drinking water 
from springs and wells. In poorer houses, water is laboriously 
carried in buckets from the spring or is lifted from the well by the 
windlass. In more prosperous houses, pumps are installed; this is an 
improvement over the original methods, but the quantity of water 
consumed by the average family is so great as to make the task of 
pumping an arduous one. 

The average amount of water used per day by one person is 25 gallons. 
This includes water for drinking, cooking, dish washing, bathing, 
laundry. For a family of five, therefore, the daily consumption would 
be 125 gallons; if to this be added the water for a single horse, cow, 
==========
and pig, the total amount needed will be approximately 150 gallons per 
day. A strong man can pump that amount from an ordinary well in about 
one hour, but if the well is deep, more time and strength are 
required. 

The invention of the windmill was a great boon to country folks 
because it eliminated from their always busy life one task in which 
labor and time were consumed. 

177. The Principle of the Windmill. The toy pin wheel is a windmill 
in miniature. The wind strikes the sails, and causes rotation; and the 
stronger the wind blows, the faster will the wheel rotate. In 
windmills, the sails are of wood or steel, instead of paper, but the 
principle is identical. 

[Illustration: FIG. 124.--The toy pin wheel is a miniature windmill.] 

As the wheel rotates, its motion is communicated to a mechanical 
device which makes use of it to raise and lower a plunger, and hence 
as long as the wind turns the windmill, water is raised. The water 
thus raised empties into a large tank, built either in the windmill 
tower or in the garret of the house, and from the tank the water 
flows through pipes to the different parts of the house. On very windy 
days the wheel rotates rapidly, and the tank fills quickly; in order 
to guard against an overflow from the tank a mechanical device is 
installed which stops rotation of the wheel when the tank is nearly 
full. The supply tank is usually large enough to hold a supply of 
water sufficient for several days, and hence a continuous calm of a 
day or two does not materially affect the house flow. When once built, 
a windmill practically takes care of itself, except for oiling, and is 
an efficient and cheap domestic possession. 

[Illustration: FIG. 125.--The windmill pumps water into the tank.] 

178. Steam as a Working Power. If a delicate vane is held at an 
opening from which steam issues, the pressure of the steam will cause 
rotation of the vane (Fig. 126), and if the vane is connected with a 
machine, work can be obtained from the steam. 

When water is heated in an open vessel, the pressure of its steam is 
too low to be of practical value, but if on the contrary water is 
heated in an almost closed vessel, its steam pressure is considerable. 
If steam at high pressure is directed by nozzles against the blades of 
a wheel, rapid rotation of the wheel ensues just as it did in Figure 
121, although in this case steam pressure replaces water pressure. 
After the steam has spent itself in turning the turbine, it condenses 
into water and makes its escape through openings in an inclosing case. 
==========
In Figure 127 the protecting case is removed, in order that the form 
of the turbine and the positions of the nozzles may be visible. 

[Illustration: FIG. 126.--Steam as a source of power.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 127.--Steam turbine with many blades and 4 
nozzles.] 

A single large turbine wheel may have as many as 800,000 sails or 
blades, and steam may pour out upon these from many nozzles. 

The steam turbine is very much more efficient than its forerunner, the 
steam engine. The installation of turbines on ocean liners has been 
accompanied by great increase in speed, and by an almost corresponding 
decrease in the cost of maintenance. 

179. Steam Engines. A very simple illustration of the working of a 
steam engine is given in Figure 128. Steam under pressure enters 
through the opening _F_, passes through _N_, and presses upon the 
piston _M_. As a result _M_ moves downward, and thereby induces 
rotation in the large wheel _L_. 

[Illustration: FIG. 128.--The principle of the steam engine.] 

As _M_ falls it drives the air in _D_ out through _O_ and _P_ (the 
opening _P_ is not visible in the diagram). 

As soon as this is accomplished, a mechanical device draws up the rod 
_E_, which in turn closes the opening _N_, and thus prevents the steam 
from passing into the part of _D_ above _M_. 

But when the rod _E_ is in such a position that _N_ is closed, _O_ on 
the other hand is open, and steam rushes through it into _D_ and 
forces up the piston. This up-and-down motion of the piston causes 
continuous rotation of the wheel _L_. If the fire is hot, steam is 
formed quickly, and the piston moves rapidly; if the fire is low, 
steam is formed slowly, and the piston moves less rapidly. 

The steam engine as seen on our railroad trains is very complex, and 
cannot be discussed here; in principle, however, it is identical with 
that just described. Figure 129 shows a steam harvester at work on a 
modern farm. 

[Illustration: FIG. 129.--Steam harvester at work.] 

In both engine and turbine the real source of power is not the steam 
==========
but the fuel, such as coal or oil, which converts the water into 
steam. 

180. Gas Engines. Automobiles have been largely responsible for the 
gas engine. To carry coal for fuel and water for steam would be 
impracticable for most motor cars. Electricity is used in some cars, 
but the batteries are heavy, expensive, and short-lived, and are not 
always easily replaceable. For this reason gasoline is extensively 
used, and in the average automobile the source of power is the force 
generated by exploding gases. 

It was discovered some years ago that if the vapor of gasoline or 
naphtha was mixed with a definite quantity of air, and a light was 
applied to the mixture, an explosion would result. Modern science uses 
the force of such exploding gases for the accomplishment of work, such 
as running of automobiles and launches. 

In connection with the gasoline supply is a carburetor or sprayer, 
from which the cylinder _C_ (Fig. 130) receives a fine mist of 
gasoline vapor and air. This mixture is ignited by an automatic, 
electric sparking device, and the explosion of the gases drives the 
piston _P_ to the right. In the 4-cycle type of gas engines (Fig. 
130)--the kind used in automobiles--the four strokes are as follows: 
1. The mixture of gasoline and air enters the cylinder as the piston 
moves to the right. 2. The valves being closed, the mixture is 
compressed as the piston moves to the left. 3. The electric spark 
ignites the compressed mixture and drives the piston to the right. 4. 
The waste gas is expelled as the piston moves to the left. The exhaust 
valve is then closed, the inlet valve opened, and another cycle of 
four strokes begins. 

[Illustration: FIG. 130.--The gas engine.] 

The use of gasoline in launches and automobiles is familiar to many. 
Not only are launches and automobiles making use of gas power, but the 
gasoline engine has made it possible to propel a??roplanes through the 
==========
air. 




CHAPTER XVIII 

PUMPS AND THEIR VALUE TO MAN 


181. "As difficult as for water to run up a hill!" Is there any one 
who has not heard this saying? And yet most of us accept as a matter 
of course the stream which gushes from our faucet, or give no thought 
to the ingenuity which devised a means of forcing water upward through 
pipes. Despite the fact that water flows naturally down hill, and not 
up, we find it available in our homes and office buildings, in some of 
which it ascends to the fiftieth floor; and we see great streams of it 
directed upon the tops of burning buildings by firemen in the streets 
below. 

In the country, where there are no great central pumping stations, 
water for the daily need must be raised from wells, and the supply of 
each household is dependent upon the labor and foresight of its 
members. The water may be brought to the surface either by laboriously 
raising it, bucket by bucket, or by the less arduous method of 
pumping. These are the only means possible; even the windmill does not 
eliminate the necessity for the pump, but merely replaces the energy 
used by man in working it. 

In some parts of our country we have oil beds or wells. But if this 
underground oil is to be of service to man, it must be brought to the 
surface, and this is accomplished, as in the case of water, by the use 
of pumps. 

An old tin can or a sponge may serve to bale out water from a leaking 
rowboat, but such a crude device would be absurd if employed on our 
huge vessels of war and commerce. Here a rent in the ship's side would 
mean inevitable loss were it not possible to rid the ship of the 
inflowing water by the action of strong pumps. 

Another and very different use to which pumps are put is seen in the 
==========
compression of gases. Air is forced into the tires of bicycles and 
automobiles until they become sufficiently inflated to insure comfort 
in riding. Some present-day systems of artificial refrigeration 
(Section 93) could not exist without the aid of compressed gases. 

Compressed air has played a very important role in mining, being sent 
into poorly ventilated mines to improve the condition of the air, and 
to supply to the miners the oxygen necessary for respiration. Divers 
and men who work under water carry on their backs a tank of compressed 
air, and take from it, at will, the amount required. 

There are many forms of pumps, and they serve widely different 
purposes, being essential to the operation of many industrial 
undertakings. In the following Sections some of these forms will be 
studied. 

==========
[Illustration: FIG. 131.--Carrying water home from the spring.] 

182. The Air as Man's Servant. Long before man harnessed water for 
turbines, or steam for engines, he made the air serve his purpose, and 
by means of it raised water from hidden underground depths to the 
surface of the earth; likewise, by means of it, he raised to his 
dwelling on the hillside water from the stream in the valley below. 
Those who live in cities where running water is always present in the 
home cannot realize the hardship of the days when this "ready-made" 
supply did not exist, but when man laboriously carried to his 
dwelling, from distant spring and stream, the water necessary for the 
daily need. 

What are the characteristics of the air which have enabled man to 
accomplish these feats? They are well known to us and may be briefly 
stated as follows:-- 

(1) Air has weight, and 1 cubic foot of air, at atmospheric pressure, 
weighs 1-1/4 ounces. 

(2) The air around us presses with a force of about 15 pounds upon 
every square inch of surface that it touches. 

(3) Air is elastic; it can be compressed, as in the balloon or bicycle 
tire, but it expands immediately when pressure is reduced. As it 
expands and occupies more space, its pressure falls and it exerts less 
force against the matter with which it comes in contact. If, for 
example, 1 cubic foot of air is allowed to expand and occupy 2 cubic 
feet of space, the pressure which it exerts is reduced one half. When 
air is compressed, its pressure increases, and it exerts a greater 
force against the matter with which it comes in contact. If 2 cubic 
feet of air are compressed to 1 cubic foot, the pressure of the 
compressed air is doubled. (See Section 89.) 

[Illustration: FIG. 132.--The atmosphere pressing downward on _a_ 
pushes water after the rising piston _b_.] 

183. The Common Pump or Lifting Pump. Place a tube containing a 
close-fitting piston in a vessel of water, as shown in Figure 132. 
Then raise the piston with the hand and notice that the water rises in 
the piston tube. The rise of water in the piston tube is similar to 
the raising of lemonade through a straw (Section 77). The atmosphere 
presses with a force of 15 pounds upon every square inch of water in 
the large vessel, and forces some of it into the space left vacant by 
the retreating piston. The common pump works in a similar manner. It 
consists of a piston or plunger which moves back and forth in an 
air-tight cylinder, and contains an outward opening valve through 
which water and air can pass. From the bottom of the cylinder a tube 
runs down into the well or reservoir, and water from the well has 
access to the cylinder through another outward-moving valve. In 
practice the tube is known as the suction pipe, and its valve as the 
suction valve. 

In order to understand the action of a pump, we will suppose that no 
water is in the pump, and we will pump until a stream issues from the 
spout. The various stages are represented diagrammatically by Figure 
133. In (1) the entire pump is empty of water but full of air at 
atmospheric pressure, and both valves are closed. In (2) the plunger 
is being raised and is lifting the column of air that rests on it. The 
air and water in the inlet pipe, being thus partially relieved of 
downward pressure, are pushed up by the atmospheric pressure on the 
surface of the water in the well. When the piston moves downward as in 
(3), the valve in the pipe closes by its own weight, and the air in 
the cylinder escapes through the valve in the plunger. In (4) the 
piston is again rising, repeating the process of (2). In (5) the 
process of (3) is being repeated, but water instead of air is escaping 
through the valve in the plunger. In (6) the process of (2) is being 
repeated, but the water has reached the spout and is flowing out. 

[Illustration: FIG. 133. Diagram of the process of pumping.] 

After the pump is in condition (6), motion of the plunger is followed 
by a more or less regular discharge of water through the spout, and 
the quantity of water which gushes forth depends upon the speed with 
which the piston is moved. A strong man giving quick strokes can 
produce a large flow; a child, on the other hand, is able to produce 
only a thin stream. Whoever pumps must exert sufficient force to lift 
the water from the surface of the well to the spout exit. For this 
reason the pump has received the name of _lifting pump_. 

[Illustration: FIG. 134.--Force pump.] 

184. The Force Pump. In the common pump, water cannot not be raised 
higher than the spout. In many cases it is desirable to force water 
considerably above the pump itself, as, for instance, in the fire 
hose; under such circumstances a type of pump is employed which has 
received the name of _force pump_. This differs but little from the 
ordinary lift pump, as a reference to Figure 134 will show. Here both 
valves are placed in the cylinder, and the piston is solid, but the 
principle is the same as in the lifting pump. 

An upward motion of the plunger allows water to enter the cylinder, 
and the downward motion of the plunger drives water through _E_. (Is 
this true for the lift pump as well?) Since only the downward motion 
of the plunger forces water through _E_, the discharge is intermittent 
and is therefore not practical for commercial purposes. In order to 
convert this intermittent discharge into a steady stream, an air 
chamber is installed near the discharge tube, as in Figure 135. The 
water forced into the air chamber by the downward-moving piston 
compresses the air and increases its pressure. The pressure of the 
confined air reacts against the water and tends to drive it out of the 
chamber. Hence, even when the plunger is moving upward, water is 
forced through the pipe because of the pressure of the compressed 
air. In this way a continuous flow is secured. 

[Illustration: FIG 135.--The air chamber _A_ insures a continuous flow 
of water.] 

The height to which the water can be forced in the pipe depends upon 
the size and construction of the pump and upon the force with which 
the plunger can be moved. The larger the stream desired and the 
greater the height to be reached, the stronger the force needed and 
the more powerful the construction necessary. 

The force pump gets its name from the fact that the moving piston 
drives or forces the water through the discharge tube. 
==========

185. Irrigation and Drainage. History shows that the lifting pump 
has been used by man since the fourth century before Christ; for many 
present-day enterprises this ancient form of pump is inconvenient and 
impracticable, and hence it has been replaced in many cases by more 
modern types, such as rotary and centrifugal pumps (Fig. 136). In 
these forms, rapidly rotating wheels lift the water and drive it 
onward into a discharge pipe, from which it issues with great force. 
There is neither piston nor valve in these pumps, and the quantity of 
water raised and the force with which it is driven through the pipes 
depends solely upon the size of the wheels and the speed with which 
they rotate. 

Irrigation, or the artificial watering of land, is of the greatest 
importance in those parts of the world where the land is naturally too 
dry for farming. In the United States, approximately two fifths of the 
land area is so dry as to be worthless for agricultural purposes 
unless artificially watered. In the West, several large irrigating 
systems have been built by the federal government, and at present 
about ten million acres of land have been converted from worthless 
farms into fields rich in crops. Many irrigating systems use 
centrifugal pumps to force water over long distances and to supply it 
in quantities sufficient for vast agricultural needs. In many regions, 
the success of a farm or ranch depends upon the irrigation furnished 
in dry seasons, or upon man's ability to drive water from a region of 
abundance to a remote region of scarcity. 

[Illustration: FIG. 136.--Centrifugal pump with part of the casing] 
cut away to show the wheel. 

[Illustration: FIG. 137.--Agriculture made possible by irrigation.] 

The draining of land is also a matter of considerable importance; 
swamps and marshes which were at one time considered useless have been 
drained and then reclaimed and converted into good farming land. The 
surplus water is best removed by centrifugal pumps, since sand and 
sticks which would clog the valves of an ordinary pump are passed 
==========
along without difficulty by the rotating wheel. 

[Illustration: FIG. 138.--Rice for its growth needs periodical 
flooding, and irrigation often supplies the necessary water.] 

186. Camping.--Its Pleasures and its Dangers. The allurement of a 
vacation camp in the heart of the woods is so great as to make many 
campers ignore the vital importance of securing a safe water supply. A 
river bank may be beautiful and teeming with diversions, but if the 
river is used as a source of drinking water, the results will almost 
always be fatal to some. The water can be boiled, it is true, but few 
campers are willing to forage for the additional wood needed for this 
apparently unnecessary requirement; then, too, boiled water does not 
cool readily in summer, and hence is disagreeable for drinking 
purposes. 

The only safe course is to abandon the river as a source of drinking 
water, and if a spring cannot be found, to drive a well. In many 
regions, especially in the neighborhood of streams, water can be 
found ten or fifteen feet below the surface. Water taken from such a 
depth has filtered through a bed of soil, and is fairly safe for any 
purpose. Of course the deeper the well, the safer will be the water. 
With the use of such a pump as will be described, campers can, without 
grave danger, throw dish water, etc., on the ground somewhat remote 
from the camp; this may not injure their drinking water because the 
liquids will slowly seep through the ground, and as they filter 
downward will lose their dangerous matter. All the water which reaches 
the well pipes will have filtered through the soil bed and therefore 
will probably be safe. 

But while the careless disposal of wastes may not spoil the drinking 
water (in the well to be described), other laws of health demand a 
thoughtful disposal of wastes. The malarial mosquito and the typhoid 
fly flourish in unhygienic quarters, and the only way to guard against 
their dangers is to allow them neither food nor breeding place. 

The burning of garbage, the discharge of waters into cesspools, or, in 
temporary camps, the discharge of wastes to distant points through the 
agency of a cheap sewage pipe will insure safety to campers, will 
lessen the trials of flies and mosquitoes, and will add but little to 
the expense. 

187. A Cheap Well for Campers. A two-inch galvanized iron pipe with 
a strong, pointed end containing small perforations is driven into the 
ground with a sledge hammer. After it has penetrated for a few feet, 
another length is added and the whole is driven down, and this is 
repeated until water is reached. A cheap pump is then attached to the 
upper end of the drill pipe and serves to raise the water. During the 
drilling, some soil particles get into the pipe through the 
perforations, and these cloud the water at first; but after the pipe 
has once been cleaned by the upward-moving water, the supply remains 
clear. The flow from such a well is naturally small; first, because 
water is not abundant near the surface of the earth, and second, 
because cheap pumps are poorly constructed and cannot raise a large 
amount. But the supply will usually be sufficient for the needs of 
simple camp life, and many a small farm uses this form of well, not 
only for household purposes, but for watering the cattle in winter. 

If the cheapness of such pumps were known, their use would be more 
general for temporary purposes. The cost of material need not exceed 
$5 for a 10-foot well, and the driving of the pipe could be made as 
much a part of the camping as the pitching of the tent itself. If the 
camping site is abandoned at the close of the vacation, the pump can 
be removed and kept over winter for use the following summer in 
another place. In this way the actual cost of the water supply can be 
reduced to scarcely more than $3, the removable pump being a permanent 
==========
possession. In rocky or mountain regions the driven well is not 
practicable, because the driving point is blunted and broken by the 
rock and cannot pierce the rocky beds of land. 

[Illustration: FIG. 139--A driven well.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 140.--Diagram showing how supplying a city with 
good water lessens sickness and death. The lines _b_ show the relative 
number of people who died of typhoid fever before the water was 
filtered; the lines _a_ show the numbers who died after the water was 
filtered. The figures are the number of typhoid deaths occurring 
yearly out of 100,000 inhabitants.] 

188. Our Summer Vacation. It has been asserted by some city health 
officials that many cases of typhoid fever in cities can be traced to 
the unsanitary conditions existing in summer resorts. The drinking 
water of most cities is now under strict supervision, while that of 
isolated farms, of small seaside resorts, and of scattered mountain 
hotels is left to the care of individual proprietors, and in only too 
many instances receives no attention whatever. The sewage disposal is 
often inadequate and badly planned, and the water becomes dangerously 
contaminated. A strong, healthy person, with plenty of outdoor 
exercise and with hygienic habits, may be able to resist the disease 
germs present in the poor water supply; more often the summer guests 
carry back with them to their winter homes the germs of disease, and 
these gain the upper hand under the altered conditions of city and 
business life. It is not too much to say that every man and woman 
should know the source of his summer table water and the method of 
sewage disposal. If the conditions are unsanitary, they cannot be 
remedied at once, but another resort can be found and personal danger 
can be avoided. Public sentiment and the loss of trade will go far in 
furthering an effort toward better sanitation. 

In the driven well, water cannot reach the spout unless it has first 
filtered through the soil to the depth of the driven pipe; after such 
a journey it is fairly safe, unless very large quantities of sewage 
are present; generally speaking, such a depth of soil is able to 
filter satisfactorily the drainage of the limited number of people 
which a driven well suffices to supply. 

[Illustration: FIG. 141.--A deep well with the piston in the water.] 

Abundant water is rarely reached at less than 75 feet, and it would 
usually be impossible to drive a pipe to such a depth. When a large 
quantity of water is desired, strong machines drill into the ground 
and excavate an opening into which a wide pipe can be lowered. I 
recently spent a summer in the Pocono Mountains and saw such a well 
completed. The machine drilled to a depth of 250 feet before much 
water was reached and to over 300 feet before a flow was obtained 
sufficient to satisfy the owner. The water thus obtained was to be the 
sole water supply of a hotel accommodating 150 persons; the proprietor 
calculated that the requirements of his guests, for bath, toilet, 
laundry, kitchen, etc., and the domestics employed to serve them, 
together with the livery at their disposal, demanded a flow of 10 
gallons per minute. The ground was full of rock and difficult to 
penetrate, and it required 6 weeks of constant work for two skilled 
men to drill the opening, lower the suction pipe, and install the 
pump, the cost being approximately $700. 

[Illustration: FIG. 142.--Showing how drinking water can be 
contaminated from cesspool _(c)_ and wash water _(w)_.] 

The water from such a well is safe and pure except under the 
conditions represented in Figure 142. If sewage or slops be poured 
upon the ground in the neighborhood of the well, the liquid will seep 
through the ground and some may make its way into the pump before it 
has been purified by the earth. The impure liquid will thus 
contaminate the otherwise pure water and will render it decidedly 
==========
harmful. For absolute safety the sewage discharge should be at least 
75 feet from the well, and in large hotels, where there is necessarily 
a large quantity of sewage, the distance should be much greater. As 
the sewage seeps through the ground it loses its impurities, but the 
quantity of earth required to purify it depends upon its abundance; a 
small depth of soil cannot take care of an indefinite amount of 
sewage. Hence, the greater the number of people in a hotel, or the 
more abundant the sewage, the greater should be the distance between 
well and sewer. 

By far the best way to avoid contamination is to see to it that the 
sewage discharges into the ground _below_ the well; that is, to dig 
the well in such a location that the sewage drainage will be away from 
the well. 

In cities and towns and large summer communities, the sewage of 
individual buildings drains into common tanks erected at public 
expense; the contents of these are discharged in turn into harbors and 
streams, or are otherwise disposed of at great expense, although they 
contain valuable substances. It has been estimated that the drainage 
or sewage of England alone would be worth $ 80,000,000 a year if used 
as fertilizer. 

A few cities, such as Columbus and Cleveland, Ohio, realize the need 
of utilizing this source of wealth, and by chemical means deodorize 
their sewage and change it into substances useful for agricultural and 
industrial purposes. There is still a great deal to be learned on this 
subject, and it is possible that chemically treated sewage may be made 
a source of income to a community rather than an expense. 

189. Pumps which Compress Air. The pumps considered in the preceding 
Sections have their widest application in agricultural districts, 
where by means of them water is raised to the surface of the earth or 
is pumped into elevated tanks. From a commercial and industrial 
standpoint a most important class of pump is that known as the 
==========
compression type; in these, air or any other gas is compressed rather 
than rarefied. 

Air brakes and self-opening and self-closing doors on cars are 
operated by means of compression pumps. The laying of bridge and pier 
foundations, in fact all work which must be done under water, is 
possible only through the agency of compression pumps. Those who have 
visited mines, and have gone into the heart of the underground 
labyrinth, know how difficult it is for fresh air to make its way to 
the miners. Compression pumps have eliminated this difficulty, and 
to-day fresh air is constantly pumped into the mines to supply the 
laborers there. Agricultural methods also have been modified by the 
compression pump. The spraying of trees (Fig. 143), formerly done 
slowly and laboriously, is now a relatively simple matter. 

[Illustration: FIG. 143.--Spraying trees by means of a compression 
pump.] 

190. The Bicycle Pump. The bicycle pump is the best known of all 
compression pumps. Here, as in other pumps of its type, the valves 
open inward rather than outward. When the piston is lowered, 
compressed air is driven through the rubber tubing, pushes open an 
inward-opening valve in the tire, and thus enters the tire. When the 
piston is raised, the lower valve closes, the upper valve is opened 
by atmospheric pressure, and air from outside enters the cylinder; the 
next stroke of the piston drives a fresh supply of air into the tire, 
which thus in time becomes inflated. In most cheap bicycle pumps, the 
piston valve is replaced by a soft piece of leather so attached to the 
piston that it allows air to slip around it and into the cylinder, but 
prevents its escape from the cylinder (Fig. 144). 

[Illustration: FIG. 144.--The bicycle foot pump.] 

191. How a Man works under Water. Place one end of a piece of glass 
tube in a vessel of water and notice that the water rises in the tube 
(Fig. 145). Blow into the tube and see whether you can force the water 
wholly or partially down the tube. If the tube is connected to a small 
compression pump, sufficient air can be sent into the tube to cause 
the water to sink and to keep the tube permanently clear of water. 
This is, in brief, the principle employed for work under water. A 
compression pump forces air through a tube into the chamber in which 
men are to work (Fig. 146). The air thus furnished from above supplies 
the workmen with oxygen, and by its pressure prevents water from 
entering the chamber. When the task has been completed, the chamber is 
raised and later lowered to a new position. 

[Illustration: FIG. 145.--Water does not enter the tube as long as we 
blow into it.] 

Figure 147 shows men at work on a bridge foundation. Workmen, tools, 
and supplies are lowered in baskets through a central tube _BC_ 
provided with an air chamber _L_, having air-tight gates at _A_ and 
_A'_. The gate _A_ is opened and workmen enter the air chamber. The 
gate _A_ is then closed and the gate _A'_ is opened slowly to give the 
men time to get accustomed to the high pressure in _B_, and then the 
men are lowered to the bottom. Excavated earth is removed in a similar 
manner. Air is supplied through a tube _DD_. Such an arrangement for 
work under water is called a caisson. It is held in position by a mass 
of concrete _EE_. 

[Illustration: FIG. 146--The principle of work under water.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 147--Showing how men can work under water.] 

In many cases men work in diving suits rather than in caissons; these 
suits are made of rubber except for the head piece, which is of metal 
provided with transparent eyepieces. Air is supplied through a 
flexible tube by a compression pump. The diver sometimes carries on 
his back a tank of compressed air, from which the air escapes through 
a tube to the space between the body and the suit. When the air has 
become foul, the diver opens a valve in his suit and allows it to pass 
into the water, at the same time admitting a fresh supply from the 
tank. The valve opens outward from the body, and hence will allow of 
the exit of air but not of the entrance of water. When the diver 
ceases work and desires to rise to the surface, he signals and is 
drawn up by a rope attached to the suit. 

192. Combination of Pumps. In many cases the combined use of both 
exhaust and compression pumps is necessary to secure the desired 
result; as, for example, in pneumatic dispatch tubes. These are 
employed in the transportation of letters and small packages from 
building to building or between parts of the same building. A pump 
removes air from the part of the tube ahead of the package, and thus 
reduces the resistance, while a compression pump forces air into the 
tube behind the package and thus drives it forward with great speed. 
==========




CHAPTER XIX 

THE WATER PROBLEM OF A LARGE CITY 


193. It is by no means unusual for the residents of a large city or 
town to receive through the newspapers a notification that the city 
water supply is running low and that economy should be exercised in 
its use. The problem of supplying a large city with an abundance of 
pure water is among the most difficult tasks which city officials have 
to perform, and is one little understood and appreciated by the 
average citizen. 

Intense interest in personal and domestic affairs is natural, but 
every citizen, rich or poor, should have an interest in civic affairs 
as well, and there is no better or more important place to begin than 
with the water supply. One of the most stirring questions in New York 
to-day has to do with the construction of huge aqueducts designed to 
convey to the residents of the city, water from the distant Catskill 
Mountains. The growth of the population has been so phenomenally rapid 
that the combined output of all available near-by sources does not 
suffice to meet the increasing consumption. 

Where does your city obtain its water? Does it bring it to its 
reservoirs in the most economic way possible, and is there any 
legitimate excuse for the scarcity of water which many communities 
face in dry seasons? 

194. Two Possibilities. Sometimes a city is fortunate enough to be 
situated near hills and mountains through which streams flow, and in 
that case the water problem is simple. In such a case all that is 
necessary is to run pipes, usually underground, from the elevated 
lakes or streams to the individual houses, or to common reservoirs 
from which it is distributed to the various buildings. 

[Illustration: FIG. 148.--The elevated mountain lake serves as a 
source of water.] 

Figure 148 illustrates in a simple way the manner in which a mountain 
lake may serve to supply the inhabitants of a valley. The city of 
Denver, for example, is surrounded by mountains abounding in streams 
==========
of pure, clear water; pipes convey the water from these heights to the 
city, and thus a cheap and adequate flow is obtained. Such a system is 
known as the gravity system. The nearer and steeper the elevation, the 
greater the force with which the water flows through the valley pipes, 
and hence the stronger the discharge from the faucets. 

Relatively few cities and towns are so favorably situated as regards 
water; more often the mountains are too distant, or the elevation is 
too slight, to be of practical value. Cities situated in plains and 
remote from mountains are obliged to utilize the water of such streams 
as flow through the land, forcing it to the necessary height by means 
of pumps. Streams which flow through populated regions are apt to be 
contaminated, and hence water from them requires public filtration. 
Cities using such a water supply thus have the double expense of 
pumping and filtration. 

195. The Pressure of Water. No practical business man would erect a 
turbine or paddle wheel without calculating in advance the value of 
his water power. The paddle wheel might be so heavy that the stream 
could not turn it, or so frail in comparison with the water force that 
the stream would destroy it. In just as careful a manner, the size and 
the strength of municipal reservoirs and pumps must be calculated. The 
greater the quantity of water to be held in the reservoir, the heavier 
are the walls required; the greater the elevation of the houses, the 
stronger must be the pumps and the engines which run them. 

In order to understand how these calculations are made, we must study 
the physical characteristics of water just as we studied the physical 
characteristics of air. 

When we measure water, we find that 1 cubic foot of it weighs about 
62.5 pounds; this is equivalent to saying that water 1 foot deep 
presses on the bottom of the containing vessel with a force of 62.5 
pounds to the square foot. If the water is 2 feet deep, the load 
supported by the vessel is doubled, and the pressure on each square 
foot of the bottom of the vessel will be 125 pounds, and if the water 
is 10 feet deep, the load borne by each square foot will be 625 
pounds. The deeper the water, the greater will be the weight sustained 
by the confining vessel and the greater the pressure exerted by the 
water. 

[Illustration: FIG. 149.--Water 1 foot deep exerts a pressure of 62.5 
pounds a square foot.] 

Since the pressure borne by 1 square foot of surface is 62.5 pounds, 
the pressure supported by 1 square inch of surface is 1/144 of 62.5 
pounds, or .43 pound, nearly 1/2 pound. Suppose a vessel held water to 
the depth of 10 feet, then upon every square inch of the bottom of 
that vessel there would be a pressure of 4.34 pounds. If a one-inch 
tap were inserted in the bottom of the vessel so that the water flowed 
out, it would gush forth with a force of 4.34 pounds. If the water 
were 20 feet deep, the force of the outflowing water would be twice as 
strong, because the pressure would be doubled. But the flow would not 
remain constant, because as the water leaves the outlet, less and less 
of it remains in the vessel, and hence the pressure gradually sinks 
and the flow drops correspondingly. 

In seasons of prolonged drought, the streams which feed a city 
reservoir are apt to contain less than the usual amount of water, 
hence the level of the water supply sinks, the pressure at the outlet 
falls, and the force of the outflowing water is lessened (Fig. 150). 

[Illustration: FIG. 150.--The pressure at an outlet decreases as the 
level of the water supply sinks.] 

196. Why the Water Supply is not uniform in All Parts of the City. 
In the preceding Section, we saw that the flow from a faucet depends 
upon the height of the reserve water above the tap. Houses on a level 
with the main supply pipes (Figs. 148 and 151) have a strong flow 
because the water is under the pressure of a column _A_; houses 
situated on elevation _B_ have less flow, because the water is under 
the pressure of a shorter column _B_; and houses at a considerable 
elevation _C_ have a less rapid flow corresponding to the diminished 
depth _(C)_. 

Not only does the flow vary with the elevation of the house, but it 
varies with the location of the faucet within the house. Unless the 
reservoir is very high, or the pumps very powerful, the flow on the 
upper floors is noticeably less than that in the cellar, and in the 
upper stories of some high building the flow is scarcely more than a 
feeble trickle. 

[Illustration: FIG. 151.--Water pressure varies in different parts of 
a water system.] 

When the respective flows at _A_, _B_, and _C_ (Fig. 151) are measured, 
they are found to be far lower than the pressures which columns of 
water of the heights _A_, _B_, and _C_ have been shown by actual 
demonstration to exert. This is because water, in flowing from place 
to place, expends force in overcoming the friction of the pipes and 
the resistance of the air. The greater the distance traversed by the 
water in its journey from reservoir to faucet, the greater the waste 
force and the less the final flow. 

In practice, large mains lead from the reservoir to the city, smaller 
mains convey the water to the various sections of the city, and 
service pipes lead to the individual house taps. During this long 
journey, considerable force is expended against friction, and hence 
the flow at a distance from the reservoir falls to but a fraction of 
its original strength. For this reason, buildings situated near the 
main supply have a much stronger flow (Fig. 152) than those on the 
same level but remote from the supply. Artificial reservoirs are 
usually constructed on the near outskirts of a town in order that the 
frictional force lost in transmission may be reduced to a minimum. 

[Illustration: FIG. 152.--The more distant the fountain, the weaker 
the flow.] 

In the case of a natural reservoir, such as an elevated lake or 
stream, the distance cannot be planned or controlled. New York, for 
example, will secure an abundance of pure water from the Catskill 
Mountains, but it will lose force in transmission. Los Angeles is 
undertaking one of the greatest municipal projects of the day. Huge 
aqueducts are being built which will convey pure mountain water a 
distance of 250 miles, and in quantities sufficient to supply two 
million people. According to calculations, the force of the water will 
be so great that pumps will not be needed. 

197. Why Water does not always flow from a Faucet. Most of us have 
at times been annoyed by the inability to secure water on an upper 
story, because of the drawing off of a supply on a lower floor. 
During the working hours of the day, immense quantities of water are 
drawn off from innumerable faucets, and hence the quantity in the 
pipes decreases considerably unless the supply station is able to 
drive water through the vast network of pipes as fast as it is drawn 
off. Buildings at a distance from the reservoir suffer under such 
circumstances, because while the diminished pressure is ordinarily 
powerful enough to supply the lower floors, it is frequently too weak 
to force a continuous stream to high levels. At night, however, and 
out of working hours, few faucets are open, less water is drawn off at 
any one time, and the intricate pipes are constantly full of water 
under high pressure. At such times, a good flow is obtainable even on 
the uppermost floors. 

In order to overcome the disadvantage of a decrease in flow during the 
day, standpipes (Fig. 153) are sometimes placed in various sections. 
These are practically small steel reservoirs full of water and 
connecting with the city pipes. During "rush" hours, water passes from 
these into the communicating pipes and increases the available supply, 
while during the night, when the faucets are turned off, water 
==========
accumulates in the standpipe against the next emergency (Figs. 151 and 
154). The service rendered by the standpipe is similar to that of the 
air cushion discussed in Section 184. 

[Illustration: FIG. 153.--A standpipe.] 

198. The Cost of Water. In the gravity system, where an elevated 
lake or stream serves as a natural reservoir, the cost of the city's 
waterworks is practically limited to the laying of pipes. But when the 
source of the supply is more or less on a level with the surrounding 
land, the cost is great, because the supply for the entire city must 
either be pumped into an artificial reservoir, from which it can be 
distributed, or else must be driven directly through the mains (Fig. 
154). 

[Illustration: FIG. 154.--Water must be got to the houses by means of 
pumps.] 

A gallon of water weighs approximately 8.3 pounds, and hence the work 
done by a pump in raising a gallon of water to the top of an average 
house, an elevation of 50 feet, is 8.3 ?? 50, or 415 foot pounds. A 
small manufacturing town uses at least 1,000,000 gallons daily, and 
the work done by a pump in raising that amount to an elevation of 50 
feet would be 8.3 ?? 1,000,000 ?? 50, or 415,000,000 foot pounds. 

The total work done during the day by the pump, or the engine driving 
the pump, is 415,000,000 foot pounds, and hence the work done during 
one hour would be 1/24 of 415,000,000, or 17,291,666 foot pounds; the 
work done in one minute would be 1/60 of 17,291,666, or 288,194 foot 
pounds, and the work done each second would be 1/60 of 288,194, or 
4803 foot pounds. 

A 1-H.P. engine does 550 foot pounds of work each second, and 
therefore if the pump is to be operated by an engine, the strength of 
the latter would have to be 8.7 H.P. An 8.7-H.P. pumping engine 
working at full speed every second of the day and night would be able 
to supply the town with the necessary amount of water. When, however, 
we consider the actual height to which the water is raised above the 
pumping station, and the extra pumping which must be done in order to 
balance the frictional loss, it is easy to understand that in actual 
practice a much more powerful engine would be needed. The larger the 
piston and the faster it works, the greater is the quantity of water 
raised at each stroke, and the stronger must be the engine which 
operates the pump. 

In many large cities there is no one single pumping station from which 
supplies run to all parts of the city, but several pumping stations 
are scattered throughout the city, and each of them supplies a 
==========
restricted territory. 

199. The Bursting of Dams and Reservoirs. The construction of a safe 
reservoir is one of the most important problems of engineers. In 
October, 1911, a town in Pennsylvania was virtually wiped out of 
existence because of the bursting of a dam whose structure was of 
insufficient strength to resist the strain of the vast quantity of 
water held by it. A similar breakage was the cause of the fatal 
Johnstown flood in 1889, which destroyed no less than seven towns, and 
in which approximately 2000 persons are said to have lost their lives. 

Water presses not only on the bottom of a vessel, but upon the sides 
as well; a bucket leaks whether the hole is in its side or its bottom, 
showing that water presses not only downward but outward. Usually a 
leak in a dam or reservoir occurs near the bottom. Weak spots at the 
top are rare and easily repaired, but a leak near the bottom is 
usually fatal, and in the case of a large reservoir the outflowing 
water carries death and destruction to everything in its path. 

If the leak is near the surface, as at _a_ (Fig. 155), the water 
issues as a feeble stream, because the pressure against the sides at 
that level is due solely to the relatively small height of water 
above _a_ (Section 195). If the leak is lower, as at _b_, the issuing 
stream is stronger and swifter, because at that level the outward 
pressure is much greater than at _a_, the increase being due to the 
fact that the height of the water above _b_ is greater than that above 
_a_. If the leak is quite low, as at _c_, the issuing stream has a 
still greater speed and strength, and gushes forth with a force 
determined by the height of the water above _c_. 

[Illustration: FIG. 155.--The flow from an opening depends upon the 
height of water above the opening.] 

The dam at Johnstown was nearly 1/2 mile wide, and 40 feet high, and 
so great was the force and speed of the escaping stream that within an 
hour after the break had occurred, the water had traveled a distance 
==========
of 18 miles, and had destroyed property to the value of millions of 
dollars. 

If a reservoir has a depth of 100 feet, the pressure exerted upon each 
square foot of its floor is 62.5 ?? 100, or 6250 pounds; the weight 
therefore to be sustained by every square foot of the reservoir floor 
is somewhat more than 3 tons, and hence strong foundations are 
essential. The outward lateral pressure at a depth of 25 feet would be 
only one fourth as great as that on the bottom--hence the strain on 
the sides at that depth would be relatively slight, and a less 
powerful construction would suffice. But at a depth of 50 feet the 
pressure on the sides would be one half that of the floor pressure, or 
1-1/2 tons. At a depth of 75 feet, the pressure on the sides would be 
three quarters that on the bottom, or 2-1/4 tons. As the bottom of the 
reservoir is approached, the pressure against the sides increases, and 
more powerful construction becomes necessary. 

Small elevated tanks, like those of the windmill, frequently have 
heavy iron bands around their lower portion as a protection against 
the extra strain. 

Before erecting a dam or reservoir, the maximum pressure to be exerted 
upon every square inch of surface should be accurately calculated, and 
the structure should then be built in such a way that the varying 
pressure of the water can be sustained. It is not sufficient that the 
bottom be strong; the sides likewise must support their strain, and 
hence must be increased in strength with depth. This strengthening of 
the walls is seen clearly in the reservoir shown in Figure 152. The 
bursting of dams and reservoirs has occasioned the loss of so many 
lives, and the destruction of so much property, that some states are 
considering the advisability of federal inspection of all such 
structures. 

[Illustration: FIG. 156.--The lock gates must be strong in order to 
withstand the great pressure of the water against them.] 

==========
200. The Relation of Forests to the Water Supply. When heavy rains 
fall on a bare slope, or when snow melts on a barren hillside, a small 
amount of the water sinks into the ground, but by far the greater part 
of it runs off quickly and swells brooks and streams, thus causing 
floods and freshets. 

When, however, rain falls on a wooded slope, the action is reversed; a 
small portion runs off, while the greater portion sinks into the soft 
earth. This is due partly to the fact that the roots of trees by their 
constant growth keep the soil loose and open, and form channels, as it 
were, along which the water can easily run. It is due also to the 
presence on the ground of decaying leaves and twigs, or humus. The 
decaying vegetable matter which covers the forest floor acts more or 
less as a sponge, and quickly absorbs falling rain and melting snow. 
The water which thus passes into the humus and the soil beneath does 
not remain there, but slowly seeps downward, and finally after weeks 
and months emerges at a lower level as a stream. Brooks and springs 
formed in this way are constant feeders of rivers and lakes. 

In regions where the land has been deforested, the rivers run low in 
season of prolonged drought, because the water which should have 
slowly seeped through the soil, and then supplied the rivers for weeks 
and months, ran off from the barren slopes in a few days. 

Forests not only lessen the danger of floods, but they conserve our 
waterways, preventing a dangerous high-water mark in the season of 
heavy rains and melting snows, and then preventing a shrinkage in dry 
seasons when the only feeders of the rivers are the underground 
sources. In the summer of 1911, prolonged drought in North Carolina 
lowered the rivers to such an extent that towns dependent upon them 
suffered greatly. The city of Charlotte was reduced for a time to a 
practically empty reservoir; washing and bathing were eliminated, 
machinery dependent upon water-power and steam stood idle, and every 
glass of water drunk was carefully reckoned. Thousands of gallons of 
water were brought in tanks from neighboring cities, and were emptied 
into the empty reservoir from whence it trickled slowly through the 
city mains. The lack of water caused not only personal inconvenience 
and business paralysis, but it occasioned real danger of disease 
through unflushed sewers and insufficiently drained pipes. 

The conservation of the forest means the conservation of our 
==========
waterways, whether these be used for transportation or as sources of 
drinking water. 




CHAPTER XX 

MAN'S CONQUEST OF SUBSTANCES 


201. Chemistry. Man's mechanical inventions have been equaled by his 
chemical researches and discoveries, and by the application he has 
made of his new knowledge. 

The plain cotton frock of our grandmothers had its death knell sounded 
a few years ago, when John Mercer showed that cotton fabrics soaked in 
caustic soda assumed under certain conditions a silky sheen, and when 
dyed took on beautiful and varied hues. The demonstration of this 
simple fact laid the foundation for the manufacture of a vast variety 
of attractive dress materials known as mercerized cotton. 

Possibly no industry has been more affected by chemical discovery than 
that of dyeing. Those of us who have seen the old masterpieces in 
painting, or reproductions of them, know the softness, the mellowness, 
the richness of tints employed by the old masters. But if we look for 
the brilliancy and variety of color seen in our own day, the search 
will be fruitless, because these were unknown until a half century 
ago. Up to that time, dyes were few in number and were extracted 
solely from plants, principally from the indigo and madder plants. But 
about the year 1856 it was discovered that dyes in much greater 
variety and in purer form could be obtained from coal tar. This 
chemical production of dyes has now largely supplanted the original 
method, and the industry has grown so rapidly that a single firm 
produced in one year from coal tar a quantity of indigo dye which 
==========
under the natural process of plant extraction would have required a 
quarter million acres of indigo plant. 

The abundance and cheapness of newspapers, coarse wrapping papers, 
etc., is due to the fact that man has learned to substitute wood for 
rags in the manufacture of paper. Investigation brought out the fact 
that wood contained the substance which made rags valuable for paper 
making. Since the supply of rags was far less than the demand, the 
problem of the extraction from wood of the paper-forming substance was 
a vital one. From repeated trials, it was found that caustic soda when 
heated with wood chips destroyed everything in the wood except the 
desired substance, cellulose; this could be removed, bleached, dried, 
and pressed into paper. The substitution of wood for rags has made 
possible the daily issue of newspapers, for the making of which 
sufficient material would not otherwise have been available. When we 
reflect that a daily paper of wide circulation consumes ten acres of 
wood lot per day, we see that all the rags in the world would be 
inadequate to meet this demand alone, to say nothing of periodicals, 
books, tissue paper, etc. 

Chemistry plays a part in every phase of life; in the arts, the 
industries, the household, and in the body itself, where digestion, 
excretion, etc., result from the action of the bodily fluids upon 
food. The chemical substances of most interest to us are those which 
affect us personally rather than industrially; for example, soap, 
which cleanses our bodies, our clothing, our household possessions; 
washing soda, which lightens laundry work; lye, which clears out the 
drain pipe clogged with grease; benzine, which removes stains from 
clothing; turpentine, which rids us of paint spots left by careless 
workmen; and hydrogen peroxide, which disinfects wounds and sores. 

In order to understand the action of several of these substances we 
==========
must study the properties of two groups of chemicals--known 
respectively as acids and bases; the first of these may be represented 
by vinegar, sulphuric acid, and oxalic acid; and the second, by 
ammonia, lye, and limewater. 

202. Acids. All of us know that vinegar and lemon juice have a sour 
taste, and it is easy to show that most acids are characterized by a 
sour taste. If a clean glass rod is dipped into very dilute acid, such 
as acetic, sulphuric, or nitric acid, and then lightly touched to the 
tongue, it will taste sour. But the best test of an acid is by sight 
rather than by taste, because it has been found that an acid is able 
to discolor a plant substance called litmus. If paper is soaked in a 
litmus solution until it acquires the characteristic blue hue of the 
plant substance, and is then dried thoroughly, it can be used to 
detect acids, because if it comes in contact with even the minutest 
trace of acid, it loses its blue color and assumes a red tint. Hence, 
in order to detect the presence of acid in a substance, one has merely 
to put some of the substance on blue litmus paper, and note whether or 
not the latter changes color. This test shows that many of our common 
foods contain some acid; for example, fruit, buttermilk, sour bread, 
and vinegar. 

The damage which can be done by strong acids is well known; if a jar 
of sulphuric acid is overturned, and some of it falls on the skin, it 
eats its way into the flesh and leaves an ugly sore; if it falls on 
carpet or coat, it eats its way into the material and leaves an 
unsightly hole. The evil results of an accident with acid can be 
lessened if we know just what to do and do it quickly, but for this we 
must have a knowledge of bases, the second group of chemicals. 

203. Bases. Substances belonging to this group usually have a bitter 
taste and a slimy, soapy feeling. For our present purposes, the most 
important characteristic of a base is that it will neutralize an acid 
and in some measure hinder the damage effected by the former. If, as 
soon as an acid has been spilled on cloth, a base, such as ammonia, is 
applied to the affected region, but little harm will be done. In your 
laboratory experiments you may be unfortunate enough to spill acid on 
your body or clothing; if so, quickly apply ammonia. If you delay, the 
acid does its work, and there is no remedy. If soda (a base) touches 
black material, it discolors it and leaves an ugly brown spot; but the 
application of a little acid, such as vinegar or lemon juice, will 
often restore the original color and counteract the bad effects of the 
base. Limewater prescribed by physicians in cases of illness is a 
well-known base. This liquid neutralizes the too abundant acids 
present in a weak system and so quiets and tones the stomach. 

The interaction of acids and bases may be observed in another way. If 
blue litmus paper is put into an acid solution, its color changes to 
==========
red; if now the red litmus paper is dipped into a base solution, 
caustic soda, for example, its original color is partially restored. 
What the acid does, the base undoes, either wholly or in part. Bases 
always turn red litmus paper blue. 

Bases, like acids, are good or bad according to their use; if they 
come in contact with cloth, they eat or discolor it, unless 
neutralized by an acid. But this property of bases, harmful in one 
way, is put to advantage in the home, where grease is removed from 
drainpipe and sink by the application of lye, a strong base. If the 
lye is too concentrated, it will not only eat the grease, but will 
corrode the metal piping; it is easy, however, to dilute base 
solutions to such a degree that they will not affect piping, but will 
remove grease. Dilute ammonia is used in almost every home and is an 
indispensable domestic servant; diluted sufficiently, it is 
invaluable in the washing of delicate fabrics and in the removing of 
stains, and in a more concentrated form it is helpful as a smelling 
salt in cases of fainting. 

Some concentrated bases are so powerful in their action on grease, 
cloth, and metal that they have received the designation _caustic_, 
and are ordinarily known as caustic soda, caustic potash (lye), and 
caustic lime. These more active bases are generally called alkalies in 
distinction from the less active ones. 

204. Neutral Substances. To any acid solution add gradually a small 
quantity of a base, and test the mixture from time to time with blue 
litmus paper; at first the paper will turn red quickly, but as more 
and more of the base is added to the solution, it has less and less 
effect on the blue litmus paper, and finally a point is reached when a 
fresh strip of blue paper will not be affected. Such a result 
indicates infallibly the absence of any acid qualities in the 
solution. If now red litmus paper is tested in the same solution, its 
color also will remain unchanged; such a result indicates infallibly 
the absence of any basic quality. The solution has the characteristic 
property of neither acid nor base and is said to be neutral. 

If to the neutral solution an extra portion of base is added, so that 
there is an excess of base over acid, the neutralization is 
overbalanced and the red paper turns blue. If to the neutral solution 
an extra portion of acid is added, so that there is an excess of acid 
over base, the neutralization is overbalanced in the opposite 
direction, and the solution acquires acid characteristics. 

Most acids and bases will eat and corrode and discolor, while neutral 
==========
substances will not; it is for this reason that soap, a slightly 
alkaline substance, is the safest cleansing agent for laundry, bath, 
and general work. Good soaps, being carefully made, are so nearly 
neutral that they will not fade the color out of clothing; the cheap 
soaps are less carefully prepared and are apt to have a strong excess 
of the base ingredient; such soaps are not safe for delicate work. 

205. Soap. If we gather together scrapings of lard, butter, bits of 
tallow from burned-out candles, scraps of waste fat, or any other sort 
of grease, and pour a strong solution of lye over the mass, a soft 
soapy substance is formed. In colonial times, every family made its 
own supply of soap, utilizing, for that purpose, household scraps 
often regarded by the housekeeper of to-day as worthless. Grease and 
fat were boiled with water and hardwood ashes, which are rich in lye, 
and from the mixture came the soft soap used by our ancestors. In 
practice, the wood ashes were boiled in water, which was then strained 
off, and the resulting filtrate, or lye, was mixed with the fats for 
soap making. 

Most fats contain a substance of an acid nature, and are decomposed by 
the action of bases such as caustic soda and caustic potash. The acid 
component of the grease partially neutralizes the base, and a new 
substance is formed, namely, soap. 

==========
With the advance of civilization the labor of soap making passed from 
the home to the factory, very much as bread making has done in our own 
day. Different varieties of soaps appeared, of which the hard soap was 
the most popular, owing to the ease with which it could be 
transported. Within the last few years liquid soaps have come into 
favor, especially in schools, railroad stations, and other public 
places, where a cake of soap would be handled by many persons. By 
means of a simple device (Fig. 157), the soap escapes from a 
receptacle when needed. The mass of the soap does not come in contact 
with the skin, and hence the spread of contagious skin diseases is 
lessened. 

[Illustration: FIG. 157.--Liquid soap container.] 

Commercial soaps are made from a great variety of substances, such as 
tallow, lard, castor oil, coconut oil, olive oil, etc.; or in cheaper 
soaps, from rosin, cottonseed oil, and waste grease. The fats which go 
to waste in our garbage could be made a source of income, not only to 
the housewife, but to the city. In Columbus, Ohio, garbage is used as 
a source of revenue; the grease from the garbage being sold for soap 
making, and the tankage (Section 188) for fertilizer. 

206. Why Soap Cleans. The natural oil of the skin catches and 
retains dust and dirt, and makes a greasy film over the body. This 
cannot be removed by water alone, but if soap is used and a generous 
lather is applied to the skin, the dirt is "cut" and passes from the 
body into the water. Soap affects a grease film and water very much as 
the white of an egg affects oil and water. These two liquids alone do 
not mix, the oil remaining separate on the surface of the water; but 
if a small quantity of white of egg is added, an emulsion is formed, 
the oil separating into minute droplets which spread through the 
water. In the same way, soap acts on a grease film, separating it into 
minute droplets which leave the skin and spread through the water, 
carrying with them the dust and dirt particles. The warmer the water, 
the better will be the emulsion, and hence the more effective the 
removal of dirt and grease. This explanation holds true for the 
removal of grease from any surface, whether of the body, clothing, 
furniture, or dishes. 

207. Washing Powders. Sometimes soap refuses to form a lather and 
instead cakes and floats as a scum on the top of the water; this is 
not the fault of the soap but of the water. As water seeps through 
the soil or flows over the land, it absorbs and retains various soil 
constituents which modify its character and, in some cases, render it 
almost useless for household purposes. Most of us are familiar with 
the rain barrel of the country house, and know that the housewife 
prefers rain water for laundry and general work. Rain water, coming as 
it does from the clouds, is free from the chemicals gathered by ground 
water, and is hence practically pure. While foreign substances do not 
necessarily injure water for drinking purposes (Section 69), they are 
often of such a nature as to prevent soap from forming an emulsion, 
and hence from doing its work. Under such circumstances the water is 
said to be hard, and soap used with it is wasted. Even if water is 
only moderately hard, much soap is lost. The substances which make 
water hard are calcium and magnesium salts. When soap is put into 
water containing one or both of these, it combines with the salts to 
form sticky insoluble scum. It is therefore not free to form an 
emulsion and to remove grease. As a cleansing agent it is valueless. 
The average city supply contains so little hardness that it is 
satisfactory for toilet purposes; but in the laundry, where there is 
need for the full effect of the soap, and where the slightest loss 
would aggregate a great deal in the course of time, something must be 
done to counteract the hardness. The addition of soda, or sodium 
carbonate to the water will usually produce the desired effect. 
Washing soda combines with calcium and magnesium and prevents them 
from uniting with soap. The soap is thus free to form an emulsion, 
just as in ordinary water. Washing powders are sometimes used instead 
of washing soda. Most washing powders contain, in addition to a 
softening agent, some alkali, and hence a double good is obtained from 
their use; they not only soften the water and allow the soap to form 
an emulsion, but they also, through their alkali content, cut the 
grease and themselves act as cleansers. In some cities where the water 
==========
is very hard, as in Columbus, Ohio, it is softened and filtered at 
public expense, before it leaves the reservoirs. But even under these 
circumstances, a moderate use of washing powder is general in laundry 
work. 

If washing powder is put on clothes dry, or is thrown into a crowded 
tub, it will eat the clothes before it has a chance to dissolve in the 
water. The only safe method is to dissolve the powder before the 
clothes are put into the tub. The trouble with our public laundries is 
that many of them are careless about this very fact, and do not take 
time to dissolve the powder before mixing it with the clothes. 

The strongest washing powder is soda, and this cheap form is as good 
as any of the more expensive preparations sold under fancy names. 
Borax is a milder powder and is desirable for finer work. 

One of the most disagreeable consequences of the use of hard water for 
bathing is the unavoidable scum which forms on the sides of bathtub 
and washbowl. The removal of the caked grease is difficult, and if 
soap alone is used, the cleaning of the tub requires both patience and 
hard scrubbing. The labor can be greatly lessened by moistening the 
scrubbing cloth with turpentine and applying it to the greasy film, 
which immediately dissolves and thus can be easily removed. The 
presence of the scum can be largely avoided by adding a small amount 
of liquid ammonia to the bath water. But many persons object to this; 
hence it is well to have some other easy method of removing the 
objectionable matter. 

208. To remove Stains from Cloth. While soap is, generally speaking, 
the best cleansing agent, there are occasions when other substances 
can be used to better advantage. For example, grease spots on carpet 
and non-washable dress goods are best removed by the application of 
gasoline or benzine. These substances dissolve the grease, but do not 
remove it from the clothing; for that purpose a woolen cloth should be 
laid under the stain in readiness to absorb the benzine and the grease 
dissolved in it. If the grease is not absorbed while in solution, it 
remains in the clothing and after the evaporation of the benzine 
reappears in full force. 

Cleaners frequently clean suits by laying a blotter over a grease spot 
and applying a hot iron; the grease, when melted by the heat, takes 
the easiest way of spreading itself and passes from cloth to blotter. 

209. Salts. A neutral liquid formed as in Section 204, by the action 
of hydrochloric acid and the alkali solution of caustic soda, has a 
brackish, salty taste, and is, in fact, a solution of salt. This can 
be demonstrated by evaporating the neutral liquid to dryness and 
examining the residue of solid matter, which proves to be common salt. 

When an acid is mixed with a base, the result is a substance more or 
less similar in its properties to common salt; for this reason all 
compounds formed by the neutralization of an acid with a base are 
called salts. If, instead of hydrochloric acid (HCl), we use an acid 
==========
solution of potassium tartrate, and if instead of caustic soda we use 
bicarbonate of soda (baking soda), the result is a brackish liquid as 
before, but the salt in the liquid is not common salt, but Rochelle 
salt. Different combinations of acids and bases produce different 
salts. Of all the vast group of salts, the most abundant as well as 
the most important is common salt, known technically as sodium 
chloride because of its two constituents, sodium and chlorine. 

We are not dependent upon neutralization for the enormous quantities 
of salt used in the home and in commerce. It is from the active, 
restless seas of the present, and from the dead seas of the 
prehistoric past that our vast stores of salt come. The waters of the 
Mediterranean and of our own Great Salt Lake are led into shallow 
basins, where, after evaporation by the heat of the sun, they leave a 
residue of salt. By far the largest quantity of salt, however, comes 
from the seas which no longer exist, but which in far remote ages 
dried up and left behind them their burden of salt. Deposits of salt 
formed in this way are found scattered throughout the world, and in 
our own country are found in greatest abundance in New York. The 
largest salt deposit known has a depth of one mile and exists in 
Germany. 

Salt is indispensable on our table and in our kitchen, but the amount 
of salt used in this way is far too small to account for a yearly 
consumption of 4,000,000 tons in the United States alone. The 
manufacture of soap, glass, bleaching powders, baking powders, washing 
soda, and other chemicals depends on salt, and it is for these that 
the salt beds are mined. 

210. Baking Soda. Salt is by all odds the most important sodium 
compound. Next to it come the so-called carbonates: first, sodium 
carbonate, which is already familiar to us as washing soda; and 
second, sodium bicarbonate, which is an ingredient of baking powders. 
These are both obtained from sodium chloride by relatively simple 
means; that is, by treating salt with the base, ammonia, and with 
carbon dioxide. 

==========
Washing soda has already been discussed. Since baking powders in some 
form are used in almost all homes for the raising of cake and pastry 
dough, it is essential that their helpful and harmful qualities be 
clearly understood. 

The raising of dough by means of baking soda--bicarbonate of soda--is 
a very simple process. When soda is heated, it gives off carbon 
dioxide gas; you can easily prove this for yourself by burning a 
little soda in a test tube, and testing the escaping gas in a test 
tube of limewater. When flour and water alone are kneaded and baked 
in loaves, the result is a mass so compact and hard that human teeth 
are almost powerless to crush and chew it. The problem is to separate 
the mass of dough or, in other words, to cause it to rise and lighten. 
This can be done by mixing a little soda in the flour, because the 
heat of the oven causes the soda to give off bubbles of gas, and these 
in expanding make the heavy mass slightly porous. Bread is never 
lightened with soda because the amount of gas thus given off is too 
small to convert heavy compact bread dough into a spongy mass; but 
biscuit and cake, being by nature less compact and heavy, are 
sufficiently lightened by the gas given off from soda. 

But there is one great objection to the use of soda alone as a 
leavening agent. After baking soda has lost its carbon dioxide gas, it 
is no longer baking soda, but is transformed into its relative, 
washing soda, which has a disagreeable taste and is by no means 
desirable for the stomach. 

Man's knowledge of chemicals and their effect on each other has 
enabled him to overcome this difficulty and, at the same time, to 
retain the leavening effect of the baking soda. 

211. Baking Powders. If some cooking soda is put into lemon juice or 
vinegar, or any acid, bubbles of gas immediately form and escape from 
the liquid. After the effervescence has ceased, a taste of the liquid 
will show you that the lemon juice has lost its acid nature, and has 
acquired in exchange a salty taste. Baking soda, when treated with an 
acid, is transformed into carbon dioxide and a salt. The various 
baking powders on the market to-day consist of baking soda and some 
acid substance, which acts upon the soda, forces it to give up its 
gas, and at the same time unites with the residue to form a harmless 
salt. 

Cream of tartar contains sufficient acid to act on baking soda, and is 
a convenient and safe ingredient for baking powder. When soda and 
cream of tartar are mixed dry, they do not react on each other, 
neither do they combine rapidly in _cold_ moist dough, but as soon as 
the heat of the oven penetrates the doughy mass, the cream of tartar 
combines with the soda and sets free the gas needed to raise the 
dough. The gas expands with the heat of the oven, raising the dough 
still more. Meanwhile, the dough itself is influenced by the heat and 
is stiffened to such an extent that it retains its inflated shape and 
spongy nature. 

Many housewives look askance at ready-made baking powders and prefer 
to bake with soda and sour milk, soda and buttermilk, or soda and 
cream of tartar. Sour milk and buttermilk are quite as good as cream 
of tartar, because the lactic acid which they contain combines with 
the soda and liberates carbon dioxide, and forms a harmless residue in 
the dough. 

The desire of manufacturers to produce cheap baking powders led to the 
use of cheap acids and alkalies, regardless of the character of the 
resulting salt. Alum and soda were popular for some time; but careful 
examination proved that the particular salt produced by this 
combination was not readily absorbed by the stomach, and that its 
retention there was injurious to health. For this reason, many states 
have prohibited the use of alum in baking powders. 
==========

It is not only important to choose the ingredients carefully; it is 
also necessary to calculate the respective quantities of each, 
otherwise there will be an excess of acid or alkali for the stomach to 
take care of. A standard powder contains twice as much cream of tartar 
as of bicarbonate of soda, and the thrifty housewife who wishes to 
economize, can make for herself, at small cost, as good a baking 
powder as any on the market, by mixing tartar and soda in the above 
proportions and adding a little corn starch to keep the mixture dry. 

The self-raising flour, so widely advertised by grocers, is flour in 
which these ingredients or their equivalent have been mixed by the 
manufacturer. 

212. Soda Mints. Bicarbonate of soda is practically the sole 
ingredient of the soda mints popularly sold for indigestion. These 
correct a tendency to sour stomach because they counteract the surplus 
acid in the stomach, and form with it a safe neutral substance. 

Seidlitz powder is a simple remedy consisting of two powders, one 
containing bicarbonate of soda, and the other, some acid such as cream 
of tartar. When these substances are dissolved in water and mixed, 
effervescence occurs, carbon dioxide escapes, and a solution of 
Rochelle salt remains. 

212_a_. Source of Soda. An enormous quantity of sodium carbonate, or 
soda, as it is usually called, is needed in the manufacture of glass, 
soap, bleaching powders, and other commercial products. Formerly, the 
supply of soda was very limited because man was dependent upon natural 
deposits and upon ashes of sea plants for it. Common salt, sodium 
chloride, is abundant, and in 1775 a prize was offered to any one who 
would find a way to obtain soda from salt. As a result of this, soda 
was soon manufactured from common salt. In the most recent methods of 
manufacture, salt, water, ammonia, and carbon dioxide are made to 
react. Baking soda is formed from the reaction. The baking soda is 
then heated and decomposed into washing soda or the soda of commerce. 

==========



CHAPTER XXI 

FERMENTATION 


213. While baking powder is universally used for biscuits and cake, 
it is seldom, if ever, used for bread, because it does not furnish 
sufficient gas to lighten the tough heavy mass of bread dough. Then, 
too, most people prefer the taste of yeast-raised bread. There is a 
reason for this widespread preference, but to understand it, we must 
go somewhat far afield, and must study not only the bread of to-day, 
but the bread of antiquity, and the wines as well. 

If grapes are crushed, they yield a liquid which tastes like the 
grapes; but if the liquid is allowed to stand in a warm place, it 
loses its original character, and begins to ferment, becoming, in the 
course of a few weeks, a strongly intoxicating drink. This is true not 
only of grape juice but also of the juice of all other sweet fruits; 
apple juice ferments to cider, currant juice to currant wine, etc. 
This phenomenon of fermentation is known to practically all races of 
men, and there is scarcely a savage tribe without some kind of 
fermented drink; in the tropics the fermented juice of the palm tree 
serves for wine; in the desert regions, the fermented juice of the 
century plant; and in still other regions, the root of the ginger 
plant is pressed into service. 

The fermentation which occurs in bread making is similar to that which 
is responsible for the transformation of plant juices into 
intoxicating drinks. The former process is not so old, however, since 
the use of alcoholic beverages dates back to the very dawn of history, 
and the authentic record of raised or leavened bread is but little 
more than 3000 years old. 

214. The Bread of Antiquity. The original method of bread making and 
the method employed by savage tribes of to-day is to mix crushed grain 
and water until a paste is formed, and then to bake this over a camp 
fire. The result is a hard compact substance known as unleavened 
bread. A considerable improvement over this tasteless mass is 
self-raised bread. If dough is left standing in a warm place a number 
of hours, it swells up with gas and becomes porous, and when baked, is 
less compact and hard than the savage bread. Exposure to air and 
warmth brings about changes in dough as well as in fruit juices, and 
alters the character of the dough and the bread made from it. Bread 
made in this way would not seem palatable to civilized man of the 
present day, accustomed, as he is, to delicious bread made light and 
porous by yeast; but to the ancients, the least softening and 
lightening was welcome, and self-fermented bread, therefore, 
supplanted the original unleavened bread. 

Soon it was discovered that a pinch of this fermented dough acted as a 
starter on a fresh batch of dough. Hence, a little of the fermented 
dough was carefully saved from a batch, and when the next bread was 
made, the fermented dough, or leaven, was worked into the fresh dough 
and served to raise the mass more quickly and effectively than mere 
exposure to air and warmth could do in the same length of time. This 
use of leaven for raising bread has been practiced for ages. 

Grape juice mixed with millet ferments quickly and strongly, and the 
Romans learned to use this mixture for bread raising, kneading a very 
small amount of it through the dough. 

215. The Cause of Fermentation. Although alcoholic fermentation, and 
the fermentation which goes on in raising dough, were known and 
utilized for many years, the cause of the phenomenon was a sealed book 
until the nineteenth century. About that time it was discovered, 
through the use of the microscope, that fermenting liquids contain an 
==========
army of minute plant organisms which not only live there, but which 
actually grow and multiply within the liquid. For growth and 
multiplication, food is necessary, and this the tiny plants get in 
abundance from the fruit juices; they feed upon the sugary matter and 
as they feed, they ferment it, changing it into carbon dioxide and 
alcohol. The carbon dioxide, in the form of small bubbles, passes off 
from the fermenting mass, while the alcohol remains in the liquid, 
giving the stimulating effect desired by imbibers of alcoholic drinks. 
The unknown strange organisms were called yeast, and they were the 
starting point of the yeast cakes and yeast brews manufactured to-day 
on a large scale, not only for bread making but for the commercial 
production of beer, ale, porter, and other intoxicating drinks. 

The grains, rye, corn, rice, wheat, from which meal is made, contain 
only a small quantity of sugar, but, on the other hand, they contain a 
large quantity of starch which is easily convertible into sugar. Upon 
this the tiny yeast plants in the dough feed, and, as in the case of 
the wines, ferment the sugar, producing carbon dioxide and alcohol. 
The dough is thick and sticky and the gas bubbles expand it into a 
spongy mass. The tiny yeast plants multiply and continue to make 
alcohol and gas, and in consequence, the dough becomes lighter and 
lighter. When it has risen sufficiently, it is kneaded and placed in 
an oven; the heat of the oven soon kills the yeast plants and drives 
the alcohol out of the bread; at the same time it expands the 
imprisoned gas bubbles and causes them to lighten and swell the bread 
still more. Meanwhile, the dough has become stiff enough to support 
itself. The result of the fermentation is a light, spongy loaf. 

216. Where does Yeast come From? The microscopic plants which we 
call yeast are widely distributed in the air, and float around there 
until chance brings them in contact with a substance favorable to 
their growth, such as fruit juices and moist warm batter. Under the 
favorable conditions of abundant moisture, heat, and food, they grow 
and multiply rapidly, and cause the phenomenon of fermentation. Wild 
yeast settles on the skin of grapes and apples, but since it does not 
have access to the fruit juices within, it remains inactive very much 
as a seed does before it is planted. But when the fruit is crushed, 
the yeast plants get into the juice, and feeding on it, grow and 
multiply. The stray yeast plants which get into the sirup are 
relatively few, and hence fermentation is slow; it requires several 
weeks for currant wine to ferment, and several months for the juice of 
grapes to be converted into wine. 

Stray yeast finds a favorable soil for growth in the warmth and 
moisture of a batter; but although the number of these stray plants is 
very large, it is insufficient to cause rapid fermentation, and if we 
depended upon wild yeast for bread raising, the result would not be to 
our liking. 

When our remote ancestors saved a pinch of dough as leaven for the 
next baking, they were actually cultivating yeast, although they did 
not know it. The reserved portion served as a favorable breeding place 
to the yeast plants within it; they grew and reproduced amazingly, and 
became so numerous, that the small mass of old dough in which they 
were gathered served to leaven the entire batch at the next baking. 

As soon as man learned that yeast plants caused fermentation in 
liquors and bread, he realized that it would be to his advantage to 
cultivate yeast and to add it to bread and to plant juices rather than 
to depend upon accidental and slow fermentation from wild yeast. 
Shortly after the discovery of yeast in the nineteenth century, man 
commenced his attempt to cultivate the tiny organisms. Their 
microscopic size added greatly to his trouble, and it was only after 
years of careful and tedious investigation that he was able to perfect 
the commercial yeast cakes and yeast brews universally used by bakers 
and brewers. The well-known compressed yeast cake is simply a mass of 
live and vigorous yeast plants, embedded in a soft, soggy material, 
and ready to grow and multiply as soon as they are placed under proper 
conditions of heat, moisture, and food. Seeds which remain on our 
shelves do not germinate, but those which are planted in the soil do; 
so it is with the yeast plants. While in the cake they are as lifeless 
==========
as the seed; when placed in dough, or fruit juice, or grain water, 
they grow and multiply and cause fermentation. 




CHAPTER XXII 

BLEACHING 


217. The beauty and the commercial value of uncolored fabrics depend 
upon the purity and perfection of their whiteness; a man's white 
collar and a woman's white waist must be pure white, without the 
slightest tinge of color. But all natural fabrics, whether they come 
from plants, like cotton and linen, or from animals, like wool and 
silk, contain more or less coloring matter, which impairs the 
whiteness. This coloring not only detracts from the appearance of 
fabrics which are to be worn uncolored, but it seriously interferes 
with the action of dyes, and at times plays the dyer strange tricks. 

Natural fibers, moreover, are difficult to spin and weave unless some 
softening material such as wax or resin is rubbed lightly over them. 
The matter added to facilitate spinning and weaving generally detracts 
from the appearance of the uncolored fabric, and also interferes with 
successful dyeing. Thus it is easy to see that the natural coloring 
matter and the added foreign matter must be entirely removed from 
fabrics destined for commercial use. Exceptions to this general fact 
are sometimes made, because unbleached material is cheaper and more 
durable than the bleached product, and for some purposes is entirely 
satisfactory; unbleached cheesecloth and sheeting are frequently 
purchased in place of the more expensive bleached material. Formerly, 
the only bleaching agent known was the sun's rays, and linen and 
cotton were put out to sun for a week; that is, the unbleached 
fabrics were spread on the grass and exposed to the bleaching action 
of sun and dew. 
==========

[Illustration: FIG. 158.--Preparing chlorine from hydrochloric acid 
and manganese dioxide.] 

218. An Artificial Bleaching Agent. While the sun's rays are 
effective as a bleaching agent, the process is slow; moreover, it 
would be impossible to expose to the sun's rays the vast quantity of 
fabrics used in the civilized world of to-day, and the huge and 
numerous bolts of material which daily come from our looms and 
factories must therefore be whitened by artificial means. The 
substance almost universally used as a rapid artificial bleaching 
agent is chlorine, best known to us as a constituent of common salt. 
Chlorine is never free in nature, but is found in combination with 
other substances, as, for example, in combination with sodium in salt, 
or with hydrogen in hydrochloric acid. 

The best laboratory method of securing free chlorine is to heat in a 
water bath a mixture of hydrochloric acid and manganese dioxide, a 
compound containing one part of manganese and two parts of oxygen. The 
heat causes the manganese dioxide to give up its oxygen, which 
immediately combines with the hydrogen of the hydrochloric acid and 
forms water. The manganese itself combines with part of the chlorine 
originally in the acid, but not with all. There is thus some free 
chlorine left over from the acid, and this passes off as a gas and can 
be collected, as in Figure 158. Free chlorine is heavier than air, and 
hence when it leaves the exit tube it settles at the bottom of the 
jar, displacing the air, and finally filling the bottle. 

Chlorine is a very active substance and combines readily with most 
substances, but especially with hydrogen; if chlorine comes in contact 
with steam, it abstracts the hydrogen and unites with it to form 
hydrochloric acid, but it leaves the oxygen free and uncombined. This 
tendency of chlorine to combine with hydrogen makes it valuable as a 
==========
bleaching agent. In order to test the efficiency of chlorine as a 
bleaching agent, drop a wet piece of colored gingham or calico into 
the bottle of chlorine, and notice the rapid disappearance of color 
from the sample. If unbleached muslin is used, the moist strip loses 
its natural yellowish hue and becomes a clear, pure white. The 
explanation of the bleaching power of chlorine is that the chlorine 
combines with the hydrogen of the water and sets oxygen free; the 
uncombined free oxygen oxidizes the coloring matter in the cloth and 
destroys it. 

Chlorine has no effect on dry material, as may be seen if we put dry 
gingham into the jar; in this case there is no water to furnish 
hydrogen for combination with the chlorine, and no oxygen to be set 
free. 

219. Bleaching Powder. Chlorine gas has a very injurious effect on 
the human body, and hence cannot be used directly as a bleaching 
agent. It attacks the mucous membrane of the nose and lungs, and 
produces the effect of a severe cold or catarrh, and when inhaled, 
causes death. But certain compounds of chlorine are harmless, and can 
be used instead of chlorine for destroying either natural or 
artificial dyes. One of these compounds, namely, chloride of lime, is 
the almost universal bleaching agent of commerce. It comes in the form 
of powder, which can be dissolved in water to form the bleaching 
solution in which the colored fabrics are immersed. But fabrics 
immersed in a bleaching powder solution do not lose their color as 
would naturally be expected. The reason for this is that the chlorine 
gas is not free to do its work, but is restricted by its combination 
with the other substances. By experiment it has been found that the 
addition to the bleaching solution of an acid, such as vinegar or 
lemon juice or sulphuric acid, causes the liberation of the chlorine. 
The chlorine thus set free reacts with the water and liberates oxygen; 
this in turn destroys the coloring matter in the fibers, and 
transforms the material into a bleached product. 

The acid used to liberate the chlorine from the bleaching powder, and 
the chlorine also, rot materials with which they remain in contact for 
any length of time. For this reason, fabrics should be removed from 
the bleaching solution as soon as possible, and should then be rinsed 
in some solution, such as ammonia, which is capable of neutralizing 
the harmful substances; finally the fabric should be thoroughly rinsed 
in water in order that all foreign matter may be removed. The reason 
home bleaching is so seldom satisfactory is that most amateurs fail to 
realize the necessity of immediate neutralization and rinsing, and 
allow the fabric to remain too long in the bleaching solution, and 
allow it to dry with traces of the bleaching substances present in the 
fibers. Material treated in this way is thoroughly bleached, but is at 
the same time rotten and worthless. Chloride of lime is frequently 
used in laundry work; the clothes are whiter than when cleaned with 
soap and simple washing powders, but they soon wear out unless the 
precaution has been taken to add an "antichlor" or neutralizer to the 
bleaching solution. 

220. Commercial Bleaching. In commercial bleaching the material to 
be bleached is first moistened with a very weak solution of sulphuric 
acid or hydrochloric acid, and is then immersed in the bleaching 
powder solution. As the moist material is drawn through the bleaching 
solution, the acid on the fabric acts upon the solution and releases 
chlorine. The chlorine liberates oxygen from the water. The oxygen in 
turn attacks the coloring matter and destroys it. 

[Illustration: FIG. 159.--The material to be bleached is drawn through 
an acid _a_, then through a bleaching solution _b_, and finally 
through a neutralizing solution _c_.] 

The bleached material is then immersed in a neutralizing bath and is 
finally rinsed thoroughly in water. Strips of cotton or linen many 
miles long are drawn by machinery into and out of the various 
solutions (Fig. 159), are then passed over pressing rollers, and 
emerge snow white, ready to be dyed or to be used as white fabric. 

221. Wool and Silk Bleaching. Animal fibers like silk, wool, and 
feathers, and some vegetable fibers like straw, cannot be bleached by 
means of chlorine, because it attacks not only the coloring matter but 
the fiber itself, and leaves it shrunken and inferior. Cotton and 
linen fibers, apart from the small amount of coloring matter present 
in them, contain nothing but carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, while 
animal fibers contain in addition to these elements some compounds of 
nitrogen. The presence of these nitrogen compounds influences the 
action of the chlorine and produces unsatisfactory results. For animal 
fibers it is therefore necessary to discard chlorine as a bleaching 
agent, and to substitute a substance which will have a less disastrous 
action upon the fibers. Such a substance is to be had in sulphurous 
acid. When sulphur burns, as in a match, it gives off disagreeable 
fumes, and if these are made to bubble into a vessel containing water, 
they dissolve and form with the water a substance known as sulphurous 
acid. That this solution has bleaching properties is shown by the fact 
that a colored cloth dipped into it loses its color, and unbleached 
fabrics immersed in it are whitened. The harmless nature of sulphurous 
acid makes it very desirable as a bleaching agent, especially in the 
home. 

Silk, lace, and wool when bleached with chlorine become hard and 
brittle, but when whitened with sulphurous acid, they retain their 
natural characteristics. 

This mild form of a bleaching substance has been put to uses which are 
now prohibited by the pure food laws. In some canneries common corn is 
whitened with sulphurous acid, and is then sold under false 
representations. Cherries are sometimes bleached and then colored with 
the bright shades which under natural conditions indicate freshness. 

Bleaching with chlorine is permanent, the dyestuff being destroyed by 
the chlorine; but bleaching with sulphurous acid is temporary, because 
the milder bleach does not actually destroy the dyestuff, but merely 
==========
modifies it, and in time the natural yellow color of straw, cotton, 
and linen reappears. The yellowing of straw hats during the summer is 
familiar to everyone; the straw is merely resuming its natural color 
which had been modified by the sulphurous acid solution applied to the 
straw when woven. 

222. Why the Color Returns. Some of the compounds formed by the 
sulphurous acid bleaching process are gradually decomposed by 
sunlight, and in consequence the original color is in time partially 
restored. The portion of a hat protected by the band retains its 
fresh appearance because the light has not had access to it. Silks and 
other fine fabrics bleached in this way fade with age, and assume an 
unnatural color. One reason for this is that the dye used to color the 
fabric requires a clear white background, and loses its characteristic 
hues when its foundation is yellow instead of white. Then, too, 
dyestuffs are themselves more or less affected by light, and fade 
slowly under a strong illumination. 

Materials which are not exposed directly to an intense and prolonged 
illumination retain their whiteness for a long time, and hence dress 
materials and hats which have been bleached with sulphurous acid 
should be protected from the sun's glare when not in use. 

223. The Removal of Stains. Bleaching powder is very useful in the 
removal of stains from white fabrics. Ink spots rubbed with lemon 
juice and dipped in bleaching solution fade away and leave on the 
cloth no trace of discoloration. Sometimes these stains can be removed 
by soaking in milk, and where this is possible, it is the better 
method. 

Bleaching solution, however, while valuable in the removal of some 
stains, is unable to remove paint stains, because paints owe their 
color to mineral matter, and on this chlorine is powerless to act. 
Paint stains are best removed by the application of gasoline followed 
==========
by soap and water. 




CHAPTER XXIII 

DYEING 


224. Dyes. One of the most important and lucrative industrial 
processes of the world to-day is that of staining and dyeing. Whether 
we consider the innumerable shades of leather used in shoes and 
harnesses and upholstery; the multitude of colors in the paper which 
covers our walls and reflects light ranging from the somber to the 
gay, and from the delicate to the gorgeous; the artificial scenery 
which adorns the stage and by its imitation of trees and flowers and 
sky translates us to the Forest of Arden; or whether we consider the 
uncounted varieties of color in dress materials, in carpets, and in 
hangings, we are dealing with substances which owe their beauty to 
dyes and dyestuffs. 

The coloring of textile fabrics, such as cotton, wool, and silk, far 
outranks in amount and importance that of leather, paper, etc., and 
hence the former only will be considered here; but the theories and 
facts relative to textile dyeing are applicable in a general way to 
all other forms as well. 

225. Plants as a Source of Dyes. Among the most beautiful examples 
of man's handiwork are the baskets and blankets of the North American 
Indians, woven with a skill which cannot be equaled by manufacturers, 
and dyed in mellow colors with a few simple dyes extracted from local 
plants. The magnificent rugs and tapestries of Persia and Turkey, and 
the silks of India and Japan, give evidence that a knowledge of dyes 
is widespread and ancient. Until recently, the vegetable world was 
the source of practically all coloring matter, the pulverized root of 
the madder plant yielding the reds, the leaves and stems of the indigo 
plant the blues, the heartwood of the tropical logwood tree the blacks 
and grays, and the fruit of certain palm and locust trees yielding the 
soft browns. So great was the commercial demand for dyestuffs that 
large areas of land were given over to the exclusive cultivation of 
the more important dye plants. Vegetable dyes are now, however, rarely 
used because about the year 1856 it was discovered that dyes could be 
obtained from coal tar, the thick sticky liquid formed as a by-product 
in the manufacture of coal gas. These artificial coal-tar, or aniline, 
dyes have practically undisputed sway to-day, and the vast areas of 
land formerly used for the cultivation of vegetable dyes are now free 
for other purposes. 

==========
226. Wool and Cotton Dyeing. If a piece of wool is soaked in a 
solution of a coal-tar dye, such as magenta, the fiber of the cloth 
draws some of the dye out of the solution and absorbs it, becoming in 
consequence beautifully colored. The coloring matter becomes "part and 
parcel," as it were, of the wool fiber, because repeated washing of 
the fabric fails to remove the newly acquired color; the magenta 
coloring matter unites chemically with the fiber of the wool, and 
forms with it a compound insoluble in water, and hence fast to 
washing. 

But if cotton is used instead of wool, the acquired color is very 
faint, and washes off readily. This is because cotton fibers possess 
no chemical substance capable of uniting with the coloring matter to 
form a compound insoluble in water. 

If magenta is replaced by other artificial dyes,--for example, 
scarlets,--the result is similar; in general, wool material absorbs 
dye readily, and uniting with it is permanently dyed. Cotton material, 
on the other hand, does not combine chemically with coloring matter 
and therefore is only faintly tinged with color, and loses this when 
washed. When silk and linen are tested, it is found that the former 
behaves in a general way as did wool, while the linen has more 
similarity to the cotton. That vegetable fibers, such as cotton and 
linen, should act differently toward coloring matter from animal 
fibers, such as silk and wool, is not surprising when we consider that 
the chemical nature of the two groups is very different; vegetable 
fibers contain only oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen, while animal fibers 
always contain nitrogen in addition, and in many cases sulphur as 
well. 

227. The Selection of Dyes. When silk and wool, cotton and linen, 
are tested in various dye solutions, it is found that the former have, 
in general, a great affinity for coloring matter and acquire a 
permanent color, but that cotton and linen, on the other hand, have 
little affinity for dyestuffs. The color acquired by vegetable fibers 
is, therefore, usually faint. 

There are, of course, many exceptions to the general statement that 
animal fibers dye readily and vegetable fibers poorly, because certain 
dyes fail utterly with woolen and silk material and yet are fairly 
satisfactory when applied to cotton and linen fabrics. Then, too, a 
dye which will color silk may not have any effect on wool in spite of 
the fact that wool, like silk, is an animal fiber; and certain 
dyestuffs to which cotton responds most beautifully are absolutely 
without effect on linen. 

The nature of the material to be dyed determines the coloring matter 
to be used; in dyeing establishments a careful examination is made of 
all textiles received for dyeing, and the particular dyestuffs are 
then applied which long experience has shown to be best suited to the 
material in question. Where "mixed goods," such as silk and wool, or 
cotton and wool, are concerned, the problem is a difficult one, and 
the countless varieties of gorgeously colored mixed materials give 
evidence of high perfection in the art of dyeing and weaving. 

Housewives who wish to do successful home dyeing should therefore not 
purchase dyes indiscriminately, but should select the kind best suited 
to the material, because the coloring principle which will remake a 
silk waist may utterly ruin a woolen skirt or a linen suit. Powders 
designed for special purposes may be purchased from druggists. 

228. Indirect Dyeing. We have seen that it is practically impossible 
to color cotton and linen in a simple manner with any degree of 
permanency, because of the lack of chemical action between vegetable 
fibers and coloring matter. But the varied uses to which dyed articles 
are put make fastness of color absolutely necessary. A shirt, for 
example, must not be discolored by perspiration, nor a waist faded by 
washing, nor a carpet dulled by sweeping with a dampened broom. In 
order to insure permanency of dyes, an indirect method was originated 
which consisted of adding to the fibers a chemical capable of acting 
upon the dye and forming with it a colored compound insoluble in 
water, and hence "safe." For example, cotton material dyed directly in 
==========
logwood solution has almost no value, but if it is soaked in a 
solution of oxalic acid and alum until it becomes saturated with the 
chemicals, and is then transferred to a logwood bath, the color 
acquired is fast and beautiful. 

This method of indirect dyeing is known as the mordanting process; it 
consists of saturating the fabric to be dyed with chemicals which will 
unite with the coloring matter to form compounds unaffected by water. 
The chemicals are called mordants. 

229. How Variety of Color is Secured. The color which is fixed on 
the fabric as a result of chemical action between mordant and dye is 
frequently very different from that of the dye itself. Logwood dye 
when used alone produces a reddish brown color of no value either for 
beauty or permanence; but if the fabric to be dyed is first mordanted 
with a solution of alum and oxalic acid and is then immersed in a 
logwood bath, it acquires a beautiful blue color. 

Moreover, since the color acquired depends upon the mordant as well as 
upon the dye, it is often possible to obtain a wide range of colors by 
varying the mordant used, the dye remaining the same. For example, 
with alum and oxalic acid as a mordant and logwood as a dye, blue is 
obtained; but with a mordant of ferric sulphate and a dye of logwood, 
blacks and grays result. Fabrics immersed directly in alizarin acquire 
a reddish yellow tint; when, however, they are mordanted with certain 
aluminium compounds they acquire a brilliant Turkey red, when 
mordanted with chromium compounds, a maroon, and when mordanted with 
iron compounds, the various shades of purple, lilac, and violet 
result. 

230. Color Designs in Cloth. It is thought that the earliest 
attempts at making "fancy materials" consisted in painting designs on 
a fabric by means of a brush. In more recent times the design was cut 
in relief on hard wood, the relief being then daubed with coloring 
matter and applied by hand to successive portions of the cloth. The 
most modern method of design-making is that of machine or roller 
printing. In this, the relief blocks are replaced by engraved copper 
rolls which rotate continuously and in the course of their rotation 
automatically receive coloring matter on the engraved portion. The 
cloth is to be printed is then drawn uniformly over the rotating roll, 
receiving color from the engraved design; in this way, the color 
pattern is automatically printed on the cloth with perfect regularity. 
In cases where the fabrics do not unite directly with the coloring 
matter, the design is supplied with a mordant and the impression made 
on the fabric is that of the mordant; when the fabric is later 
transferred to a dye bath, the mordanted portions, represented by the 
design, unite with the coloring matter and thus form the desired color 
patterns. 

Unless the printing is well done, the coloring matter does not 
thoroughly penetrate the material, and only a faint blurred design 
appears on the back of the cloth; the gaudy designs of cheap calicoes 
and ginghams often do not show at all on the under side. Such 
carelessly made prints are not fast to washing or light, and soon 
fade. But in the better grades of material the printing is well done, 
and the color designs are fairly fast, and a little care in the 
laundry suffices to eliminate any danger of fading. 

Color designs of the greatest durability are produced by the weaving 
together of colored yarns. When yarn is dyed, the coloring matter 
penetrates to every part of the fiber, and hence the patterns formed 
by the weaving together of well-dyed yarns are very fast to light and 
water. 

If the color designs to be woven in the cloth are intricate, complex 
machinery is necessary and skillful handwork; hence, patterns formed 
by the weaving of colored yarns are expensive and less common than 
==========
printed fabrics. 




CHAPTER XXIV 

CHEMICALS AS DISINFECTANTS AND PRESERVATIVES 


231. The prevention of disease epidemics is one of the most striking 
achievements of modern science. Food, clothing, furniture, and other 
==========
objects contaminated in any way by disease germs may be disinfected by 
chemicals or by heat, and widespread infection from persons suffering 
with a contagious disease may be prevented. 

[Illustration: FIG. 160.--Pasteurizing apparatus, an arrangement by 
which milk is conveniently heated to destroy disease germs.] 

When disease germs are within the body, the problem is far from 
simple, because chemicals which would effectively destroy the germs 
would be fatal to life itself. But when germs are outside the body, as 
in water or milk, or on clothing, dishes, or furniture, they can be 
easily killed. One of the best methods of destroying germs is to 
subject them to intense heat. Contaminated water is made safe by 
boiling for a few minutes, because the strong heat destroys the 
disease-producing germs. Scalded or Pasteurized milk saves the lives 
of scores of babies, because the germs of summer complaint which lurk 
in poor milk are killed and rendered harmless in the process of 
scalding. Dishes used by consumptives, and persons suffering from 
contagious diseases, can be made harmless by thorough washing in thick 
suds of almost boiling water. 

The bedding and clothing of persons suffering with diphtheria, 
tuberculosis, and other germ diseases should always be boiled and hung 
to dry in the bright sunlight. Heat and sunshine are two of the best 
disinfectants. 

232. Chemicals. Objects, such as furniture, which cannot be boiled, 
are disinfected by the use of any one of several chemicals, such as 
sulphur, carbolic acid, chloride of lime, corrosive sublimate, etc. 

One of the simplest methods of disinfecting consists in burning 
sulphur in a room whose doors, windows, and keyholes have been closed, 
so that the burning fumes cannot escape, but remain in the room long 
enough to destroy disease germs. This is probably the most common 
means of fumigation. 

For general purposes, carbolic acid is one of the very best 
disinfectants, but must be used with caution, as it is a deadly poison 
except when very dilute. 

Chloride of lime when exposed to the air and moisture slowly gives off 
chlorine, and can be used as a disinfectant because the gas thus set 
free attacks germs and destroys them. For this reason chloride of lime 
is an excellent disinfectant of drainpipes. Certain bowel troubles, 
such as diarrhoea, are due to microbes, and if the waste matter of a 
person suffering from this or similar diseases is allowed passage 
==========
through the drainage system, much damage may be done. But a small 
amount of chloride of lime in the closet bowl will insure 
disinfection. 

233. Personal Disinfection. The hands may gather germs from any 
substances or objects with which they come in contact; hence the hands 
should be washed with soap and water, and especially before eating. 
Physicians who perform operations wash not only their hands, but their 
instruments, sterilizing the latter by placing them in boiling water 
for several minutes. 

Cuts and wounds allow easy access to the body; a small cut has been 
known to cause death because of the bacteria which found their way 
into the open wound and produced disease. In order to destroy any 
germs which may have entered into the cut from the instrument, it is 
well to wash out the wound with some mild disinfectant, such as very 
dilute carbolic acid or hydrogen peroxide, and then to bind the wound 
with a clean cloth, to prevent later entrance of germs. 

234. Chemicals as Food Preservatives. The spoiling of meats and 
soups, and the souring of milk and preserves, are due to germs which, 
like those producing disease, can be destroyed by heat and by 
chemicals. 

Milk heated to the boiling point does not sour readily, and successful 
canning consists in cooking fruits and vegetables until all the germs 
are killed, and then sealing the cans so that germs from outside 
==========
cannot find entrance and undo the work of the canner. 

Some dealers and manufacturers have learned that certain chemicals 
will act as food preservatives, and hence they have replaced the safe 
method of careful canning by the quicker and simpler plan of adding 
chemicals to food. Catchup, sauces, and jellies are now frequently 
preserved in this way. But the chemicals which destroy bacteria 
frequently injure the consumer as well. And so much harm has been done 
by food preservatives that the pure food laws require that cans and 
bottles contain a labeled statement of the kind and quantity of 
chemicals used. 

Even milk is not exempt, but is doctored to prevent souring, the 
preservative most generally used by milk dealers being formaldehyde. 
The vast quantity of milk consumed by young and old, sick and well, 
makes the use of formaldehyde a serious menace to health, because no 
constitution can endure the injury done by the constant use of 
preservatives. 

The most popular and widely used preservatives of meats are borax and 
boric acid. These chemicals not only arrest decay, but partially 
restore to old and bad meat the appearance of freshness; in this way 
unscrupulous dealers are able to sell to the public in one form or 
other meats which may have undergone partial decomposition; sausage 
frequently contains partially decomposed meat, restored as it were by 
chemicals. 

In jams and catchups there is abundant opportunity for preservatives; 
badly or partially decayed fruits are sometimes disinfected and used 
as the basis of foods sold by so-called good dealers. Benzoate of 
soda, and salicylic acid are the chemicals most widely employed for 
this purpose, with coal-tar dyes to simulate the natural color of the 
fruit. 

Many of the cheap candies sold by street venders are not fit for 
consumption, since they are not only made of bad material, but are 
frequently in addition given a light dipping in varnish as a 
protection against the decaying influences of the atmosphere. 

The only wise preservatives are those long known and employed by our 
ancestors; salt, vinegar, and spices are all food preservatives, but 
they are at the same time substances which in small amounts are not 
injurious to the body. Smoked herring and salted mackerel are 
chemically preserved foods, but they are none the less safe and 
==========
digestible. 

235. The Preservation of Wood and Metal. The decaying of wood and 
the rusting of metal are due to the action of air and moisture. When 
wood and metal are surrounded with a covering which neither air nor 
moisture can penetrate, decay and rust are prevented. Paint affords 
such a protective covering. The main constituent of paint is a 
compound of white lead or other metallic substance; this is mixed with 
linseed oil or its equivalent in order that it may be spread over wood 
and metal in a thin, even coating. After the mixture has been applied, 
it hardens and forms a tough skin fairly impervious to weathering. For 
the sake of ornamentation, various colored pigments are added to the 
paint and give variety of effect. 

Railroad ties and street paving blocks are ordinarily protected by oil 
rather than paint. Wood is soaked in creosote oil until it becomes 
thoroughly saturated with the oily substance. The pores of the wood 
are thus closed to the entrance of air and moisture, and decay is 
avoided. Wood treated in this way is very durable. Creosote is 
poisonous to insects and many small animals, and thus acts as a 
preservation not only against the elements but against animal life as 
well. 




CHAPTER XXV 

DRUGS AND PATENT MEDICINES 


236. Stimulants and Narcotics. Man has learned not only the action 
of substances upon each other, such as bleaching solution upon 
coloring matter, washing soda upon grease, acids upon bases, but also 
the effect which certain chemicals have upon the human body. 

Drugs and their varying effects upon the human system have been known 
to mankind from remote ages; in the early days, familiar leaves, 
roots, and twigs were steeped in water to form medicines which served 
for the treatment of all ailments. In more recent times, however, 
these simple herb teas have been supplanted by complex drugs, and now 
medicines are compounded not only from innumerable plant products, but 
from animal and mineral matter as well. Quinine, rhubarb, and arnica 
are examples of purely vegetable products; iron, mercury, and arsenic 
are equally well known as distinctly mineral products, while cod-liver 
oil is the most familiar illustration of an animal remedy. Ordinarily 
a combination of products best serves the ends of the physician. 

Substances which, like cod-liver oil, serve as food to a worn-out 
==========
body, or, like iron, tend to enrich the blood, or, like quinine, aid 
in bringing an abnormal system to a healthy condition, are valuable 
servants and cannot be entirely dispensed with so long as man is 
subject to disease. 

But substances which, like opium, laudanum, and alcohol, are not 
required by the body as food, or as a systematic, intelligent aid to 
recovery, but are taken solely for the stimulus aroused or for the 
insensibility induced, are harmful to man, and cannot be indulged in 
by him without ultimate mental, moral, and physical loss. Substances 
of the latter class are known as narcotics and stimulants. 

237. The Cost of Health. In the physical as in the financial world, 
nothing is to be had without a price. Vigor, endurance, and mental 
alertness are bought by hygienic living; that is, by proper food, 
fresh air, exercise, cleanliness, and reasonable hours. Some people 
wish vigor, endurance, etc., but are unwilling to live the life which 
will develop these qualities. Plenty of sleep, exercise, and simple 
food all tend to lay the foundations of health. Many, however, are not 
willing to take the care necessary for healthful living, because it 
would force them to sacrifice some of the hours of pleasure. Sooner or 
later, these pleasure-seekers begin to feel tired and worn, and some 
==========
of them turn to drugs and narcotics for artificial strength. At first 
the drugs seem to restore the lost energy, and without harm; however, 
the cost soon proves to be one of the highest Nature ever demands. 

238. The Uncounted Cost. The first and most obvious effect of opium, 
for example, is to deaden pain and to arouse pleasure; but while the 
drug is producing these soothing sensations, it interferes with bodily 
functions. Secretion, digestion, absorption of food, and the removal 
of waste matters are hindered. Continued use of the drug leads to 
headache, exhaustion, nervous depression, and heart weakness. There is 
thus a heavy toll reckoned against the user, and the creditor is 
relentless in demanding payment. 

Moreover, the respite allowed by a narcotic is exceedingly brief, and 
a depression which is long and deep inevitably follows. In order to 
overcome this depression, recourse is usually had to a further dose, 
and as time goes on, the intervals of depression become more frequent 
and lasting, and the necessity to overcome them increases. Thus 
without intention one finds one's self bound to the drug, its fast 
victim. The sanatoria of our country are crowded with people who are 
trying to free themselves of a drug habit into which they have drifted 
unintentionally if not altogether unknowingly. What is true of opium 
is equally applicable to other narcotics. 

239. The Right Use of Narcotics. In the hands of the physician, 
narcotics are a great blessing. In some cases, by relieving pain, they 
give the system the rest necessary for overcoming the cause of the 
pain. Only those who know of the suffering endured in former times can 
fully appreciate the decrease in pain brought about by the proper use 
of narcotics. 

==========
240. Patent Medicines, Cough Sirups. A reputable physician is 
solicitous regarding the permanent welfare of his patient and 
administers carefully chosen and harmless drugs. Mere medicine 
venders, however, ignore the good of mankind, and flood the market 
with cheap patent preparations which delude and injure those who 
purchase, but bring millions of dollars to those who manufacture. 

Practically all of these patent, or proprietary, preparations contain 
a large proportion of narcotics or stimulants, and hence the benefit 
which they seem to afford the user is by no means genuine; examination 
shows that the relief brought by them is due either to a temporary 
deadening of sensibilities by narcotics or to a fleeting stimulation 
by alcohol and kindred substances. 

Among the most common ailments of both young and old are coughs and 
colds; hence many patent cough mixtures have been manufactured and 
placed on the market for the consumption of a credulous public. Such 
"quick cures" almost invariably contain one or more narcotic drugs, 
and not only do not relieve the cold permanently, but occasion 
subsequent disorders. Even lozenges and pastilles are not free from 
fraud, but have a goodly proportion of narcotics, containing in some 
cases chloroform, morphine, and ether. 

The widespread use of patent cough medicines is due largely to the 
fact that many persons avoid consulting a physician about so trivial 
an ailment as an ordinary cold, or are reluctant to pay a medical fee 
for what seems a slight indisposition and hence attempt to doctor 
themselves. 

Catarrh is a very prevalent disease in America, and consequently 
numerous catarrh remedies have been devised, most of which contain in 
==========
a disguised form the pernicious drug, cocaine. Laws have been enacted 
which require on the labels a declaration of the contents of the 
preparation, both as to the kind of drug used and the amount, and the 
choice of accepting or refusing such mixtures is left to the 
individual. But the great mass of people are ignorant of the harmful 
nature of drugs in general, and hence do not even read the 
self-accusing label, or if they do glance at it, fail to comprehend 
the dangerous nature of the drugs specified there. In order to 
safeguard the uninformed purchaser and to restrict the manufacture of 
harmful patent remedies, some states limit the sale of all 
preparations containing narcotics and thus give free rein to neither 
consumer nor producer. 

241. Soothing Sirups; Soft Drinks. The development of a race is 
limited by the mental and physical growth of its children, and yet 
thousands of its children are annually stunted and weakened by drugs, 
because most colic cures, teething concoctions, and soothing syrups 
are merely agreeably flavored drug mixtures. Those who have used such 
preparations freely, know that a child usually becomes fretful and 
irritable between doses, and can be quieted only by larger and more 
frequent supplies. A habit formed in this way is difficult to 
overcome, and many a child when scarcely over its babyhood had a 
craving which in later years may lead to systematic drug taking. And 
even though the pernicious drug craving is not created, considerable 
harm is done to the child, because its body is left weak and 
non-resistant to diseases of infancy and childhood. 

Many of our soft drinks contain narcotics. The use of the coca leaf 
and the kola nut for such preparations has increased very greatly 
within the last few years, and doubtless legislation will soon be 
instituted against the indiscriminate sale of soft drinks. 
==========

242. Headache Powders. The stress and strain of modern life has 
opened wide the door to a multitude of bodily ills, among which may be 
mentioned headache. Work must be done and business attended to, and 
the average sufferer does not take time from his vocation to 
investigate the cause of the headache, but unthinkingly grasps at any 
remedy which will remove the immediate pain, and utterly disregards 
later injury. The relief afforded by most headache mixtures is due to 
the presence of antipyrin or acetanilid, and it has been shown 
conclusively that these drugs weaken heart action, diminish 
circulation, reduce the number of red corpuscles in the blood, and 
bring on a condition of chronic anemia. Pallid cheeks and blue lips 
are visible evidence of the too frequent use of headache powders. 

The labels required by law are often deceptive and convey no adequate 
idea of the amount of drug consumed; for example, 240 grains of 
acetanilid to an ounce seems a small quantity of drug for a powder, 
but when one considers that there are only 480 grains in an ounce, it 
will be seen that each powder is one half acetanilid. 

Powders taken in small quantities and at rare intervals are apparently 
harmless; but they never remove the cause of the trouble, and hence 
the discomfort soon returns with renewed force. Ordinarily, hygienic 
living will eliminate the source of the trouble, but if it does not, a 
==========
physician should be consulted and medicine should be procured from him 
which will restore the deranged system to its normal healthy 
condition. 

243. Other Deceptions. Nearly all patent medicines contain some 
alcohol, and in many, the quantity of alcohol is far in excess of that 
found in the strongest wines. Tonics and bitters advertised as a cure 
for spring fever and a worn-out system are scarcely more than cheap 
cocktails, as one writer has derisively called them, and the amount of 
alcohol in some widely advertised patent remedies is alarmingly large 
and almost equal to that of strong whisky. 

[Illustration: FIG. 161.--Diagram showing the amount of alcohol in 
some alcoholic drinks and in one much used patent medicine.] 

Some conscientious persons who would not touch beer, wine, whisky, or 
any other intoxicating drink consume patent remedies containing large 
quantities of alcohol and thus unintentionally expose themselves to 
mental and physical danger. In all cases of bodily disorder, the only 
safe course is to consult a physician who has devoted himself to the 
study of the body and the methods by which a disordered system may be 
restored to health. 




CHAPTER XXVI 

==========
NITROGEN AND ITS RELATION TO PLANTS 


244. Nitrogen. A substance which plays an important part in animal 
and plant life is nitrogen. Soil and the fertilizers which enrich it, 
the plants which grow on it, and the animals which feed on these, all 
contain nitrogen or nitrogenous compounds. The atmosphere, which we 
ordinarily think of as a storehouse of oxygen, contains far more 
nitrogen than oxygen, since four fifths of its whole weight is made up 
of this element. 

Nitrogen is colorless, odorless, and tasteless. Air is composed 
chiefly of oxygen and nitrogen; if, therefore, the oxygen in a vessel 
filled with air can be made to unite with some other substance or can 
be removed, there will be a residue of nitrogen. This can be done by 
floating on water a light dish containing phosphorus, then igniting 
the phosphorus, and placing an inverted jar over the burning 
substance. The phosphorus in burning unites with the oxygen of the air 
and hence the gas that remains in the jar is chiefly nitrogen. It has 
the characteristics mentioned above and, in addition, does not combine 
readily with other substances. 

245. Plant Food. Food is the course of energy in every living thing 
and is essential to both animal and plant life. Plants get their food 
from the lifeless matter which exists in the air and in the soil; 
while animals get their food from plants. It is true that man and many 
other animals eat fleshy foods and depend upon them for partial 
sustenance, but the ultimate source of all animal food is plant life, 
since meat-producing animals live upon plant growth. 

Plants get their food from the air, the soil, and moisture. From the 
air, the leaves take carbon dioxide and water and transform them into 
starchy food; from the soil, the roots take water rich in mineral 
matters dissolved from the soil. From the substances thus gathered, 
the plant lives and builds up its structure. 

A food substance necessary to plant life and growth is nitrogen. Since 
a vast store of nitrogen exists in the air, it would seem that plants 
should never lack for this food, but most plants are unable to make 
use of the boundless store of atmospheric nitrogen, because they do 
not possess the power of abstracting nitrogen from the air. For this 
reason, they have to depend solely upon nitrogenous compounds which 
are present in the soil and are soluble in water. The soluble 
nitrogenous soil compounds are absorbed by roots and are utilized by 
plants for food. 

246. The Poverty of the Soil. Plant roots are constantly taking 
nitrogen and its compounds from the soil. If crops which grow from the 
soil are removed year after year, the soil becomes poorer in nitrogen, 
and finally possesses too little of it to support vigorous and healthy 
plant life. The nitrogen of the soil can be restored if we add to it a 
fertilizer containing nitrogen compounds which are soluble in water. 
Decayed vegetable matter contains large quantities of nitrogen 
compounds, and hence if decayed vegetation is placed upon soil or is 
plowed into soil, it acts as a fertilizer, returning to the soil what 
was taken from it. Since man and all other animals subsist upon 
plants, their bodies likewise contain nitrogenous substances, and 
hence manure and waste animal matter is valuable as a fertilizer or 
soil restorer. 

247. Bacteria as Nitrogen Gatherers. Soil from which crops are removed 
year after year usually becomes less fertile, but the soil from which 
crops of clover, peas, beans, or alfalfa have been removed is richer in 
nitrogen rather than poorer. This is because the roots of these plants 
often have on them tiny swellings, or tubercles, in which millions of 
certain bacteria live and multiply. These bacteria have the remarkable 
power of taking free nitrogen from the air in the soil and of combining 
it with other substances to form compounds which plants can use. The 
bacteria-made compounds dissolve in the soil water and are absorbed into 
the plant by the roots. So much nitrogen-containing material is made by 
the root bacteria of plants of the pea family that the soil in which 
they grow becomes somewhat richer in nitrogen, and if plants which 
cannot make nitrogen are subsequently planted in such a soil, they find 
there a store of nitrogen. A crop of peas, beans, or clover is 
equivalent to nitrogenous fertilizer and helps to make ready the soil 
for other crops. 

[Illustration: FIG. 162.--Roots of soy bean having tubercle-bearing 
bacteria.] 

248. Artificial Fertilizers. Plants need other foods besides 
nitrogen, and they exhaust the soil not only of nitrogen, but also of 
phosphorus and potash, since large quantities of these are necessary 
for plant life. There are many other substances absorbed from the soil 
by the plant, namely, iron, sodium, calcium, magnesium, but these are 
used in smaller quantities and the supply in the soil does not readily 
become exhausted. 

Commercial fertilizers generally contain nitrogen, phosphorus, and 
potash in amounts varying with the requirements of the soil. Wheat 
requires a large amount of phosphorus and quickly exhausts the ground 
of that food stuff; a field which has supported a crop of wheat is 
particularly poor in phosphorus, and a satisfactory fertilizer for 
that land would necessarily contain a large percentage of phosphorus. 
The fertilizer to be used in a soil depends upon the character of the 
soil and upon the crops previously grown on it. 
==========

[Illustration: FIG. 163.--Water cultures of buckwheat: 1, with all the 
food elements; 2, without potash; 3, without nitrates.] 

The quantity of fertilizer needed by the farmers of the world is 
enormous, and the problem of securing the necessary substances in 
quantities sufficient to satisfy the demand bids fair to be serious. 
But modern chemistry is at work on the problem, and already it is 
possible to make some nitrogen compounds on a commercial scale. When 
nitrogen gas is in contact with heated calcium carbide, a reaction 
takes place which results in the formation of calcium nitride, a 
compound suitable for enriching the soil. There are other commercial 
methods for obtaining nitrogen compounds which are suitable for 
absorption by plant roots. 

Phosphorus is obtained from bone ash and from phosphate rock which is 
widely distributed over the surface of the earth. Bone ash and 
thousands of tons of phosphate rock are treated with sulphuric acid to 
form a phosphorus compound which is soluble in soil water and which, 
when added to soil, will be usable by the plants growing there. 

The other important ingredient of most fertilizers is potash. Wood 
ashes are rich in potash and are a valuable addition to the soil. But 
the amount of potash thus obtained is far too limited to supply the 
needs of agriculture; and to-day the main sources of potash are the 
vast deposits of potassium salts found in Prussia. 

Although Germany now furnishes the American farmer with the bulk of 
his potash, she may not do so much longer. In 1911 an indirect potash 
tax was levied by Germany on her best customer, the United States, to 
whom 15 million dollars' worth of potash had been sold the preceding 
year. This led Americans to inquire whether potash could not be 
obtained at home. 

Geologists say that long ages ago Germany was submerged, that the 
waters slowly evaporated and that the various substances in the sea 
water were deposited in thick layers. The deposits thus left by the 
evaporation of the sea water gradually became hidden by sediment and 
soil, and lost to sight. From such deposits, potash is obtained. 
Geologists tell us that our own Western States were once submerged, 
and that the waters evaporated and disappeared from our land very much 
as they did from Germany. The Great Salt Lake of Utah is a relic of a 
great body of water. If it be true that waters once covered our 
Western States, there may be buried deposits of potash there, and 
to-day the search for the hidden treasure is going on with the energy 
and enthusiasm characteristic of America. 

Another probable source of potash is seaweed. The sea is a vast 
reservoir of potash, and seaweed, especially the giant kelp, absorbs 
large quantities of this potash. A ton of dried kelp (dried by sun and 
wind) contains about 500 pounds of pure potash. The kelps are 
==========
abundant, covering thousands of square miles in the Pacific Ocean, 
from Mexico to the Arctic Ocean. 




CHAPTER XXVII 

SOUND 


249. The Senses. All the information which we possess of the world 
around us comes to us through the use of the senses of sight, hearing, 
taste, touch, and smell. Of the five senses, sight and hearing are 
generally considered the most valuable. In preceding Chapters we 
studied the important facts relative to light and the power of vision; 
it remains for us to study Sound as we studied Light, and to learn 
what we can of sound and the power to hear. 

250. How Sound is Produced. If one investigates the source of any 
sound, he will always find that it is due to motion of some kind. A 
sudden noise is traced to the fall of an object, or to an explosion, 
or to a collision; in fact, is due to the motion of matter. A piano 
gives out sound whenever a player strikes the keys and sets in motion 
the various wires within the piano; speech and song are caused by the 
motion of chest, vocal cords, and lips. 

[Illustration: FIG. 164.--Sprays of water show that the fork is in 
motion.] 

If a large dinner bell is rung, its motion or vibration may be felt on 
touching it with the finger. If a tuning fork is made to give forth 
sound by striking it against the knee, or hitting it with a rubber 
hammer, and is then touched to the surface of water, small sprays of 
water will be thrown out, showing that the prongs of the fork are in 
rapid motion. (A rubber hammer is made by putting a piece of glass 
tubing through a rubber cork.) 

If a light cork ball on the end of a thread is brought in contact with 
a sounding fork, the ball does not remain at rest, but vibrates back 
and forth, being driven by the moving prongs. 

[Illustration: FIG. 165.--The ball does not remain at rest] 

==========
These simple facts lead us to conclude that all sound is due to the 
motion of matter, and that a sounding body of any kind is in rapid 
motion. 

251. Sound is carried by Matter. In most cases sound reaches the ear 
through the air; but air is not the only medium through which sound is 
carried. A loud noise will startle fish, and cause them to dart away, 
so we conclude that the sound must have reached them through the 
water. An Indian puts his ear to the ground in order to detect distant 
footsteps, because sounds too faint to be heard through the air are 
comparatively clear when transmitted through the earth. A gentle 
tapping at one end of a long table can be distinctly heard at the 
opposite end if the ear is pressed against the table; if the ear is 
removed from the wood, the sound of tapping is much fainter, showing 
that wood transmits sound more readily than air. We see therefore that 
sound can be transmitted to the ear by solids, liquids, or gases. 

Matter of any kind can transmit sound to the ear. The following 
experiments will show that matter is necessary for transmission. 
Attach a small toy bell to a glass rod (Fig. 166) by means of a rubber 
tube and pass the rod through one of two openings in a rubber cork. 
Insert the cork in a strong flask containing a small quantity of water 
and shake the bell, noting the sound produced. Then heat the flask, 
allowing the water to boil briskly, and after the boiling has 
continued for a few minutes remove the flame and instantly close up 
the second opening by inserting a glass stopper. Now shake the flask 
and note that the sound is very much fainter than at first. As the 
flask was warmed, air was rapidly expelled; so that when the flask was 
shaken the second time, less air was present to transmit the sound. If 
the glass stopper is removed and the air is allowed to reenter the 
flask, the loudness of the sound immediately increases. 

[Illustration: FIG. 166.--Sound is carried by the air.] 

Since the sound of the bell grows fainter as air is removed, we infer 
that there would be no sound if all the air were removed from the 
flask; that is to say, sound cannot be transmitted through empty space 
or a vacuum. If sound is to reach our ears, it must be through the 
agency of matter, such as wood, water, or air, etc. 

252. How Sound is transmitted through Air. We saw in Section 250 
that sound can always be traced to the motion or vibration of matter. 
It is impossible to conceive of an object being set into sudden and 
continued motion without disturbing the air immediately surrounding 
it. A sounding body always disturbs and throws into vibration the air 
around it, and the air particles which receive motion from a sounding 
body transmit their motion to neighboring particles, these in turn to 
the next adjacent particles, and so on until the motion has traveled 
to very great distances. The manner in which vibratory motion is 
transmitted by the atmosphere must be unusual in character, since no 
motion of the air is apparent, and since in the stillness of night 
when "not a breath of air" is stirring, the shriek of a railroad 
whistle miles distant may be heard with perfect clearness. Moreover, 
the most delicate notes of a violin can be heard in the remotest 
corners of a concert hall, when not the slightest motion of the air 
can be seen or felt. 

In our study of the atmosphere we saw that air can be compressed and 
rarefied; in other words, we saw that air is very elastic. It can be 
shown experimentally that whenever an elastic body in motion comes in 
contact with a body at rest, the moving body transfers its motion to 
the second body and then comes to rest itself. Let two billiard balls 
be suspended in the manner indicated in Figure 167. If one of the 
balls is drawn aside and is then allowed to fall against the other, 
the second ball is driven outward to practically the height from which 
the first ball fell and the first ball comes to rest. 

[Illustration: FIG. 167.--Elastic balls.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 168.--Suspended billiard balls.] 

If a number of balls are arranged in line as in Figure 168 or Figure 
169, and the end ball is raised and then allowed to fall, or if _A_ is 
pushed against _C_, the last ball _B_ will move outward alone, with a 
force nearly equal to that originally possessed by _A_ and to a 
distance nearly equal to that through which _A_ moved. But there will 
be no _visible_ motion of the intervening balls. The force of the 
moving ball _A_ is given to the second ball, and the second ball in 
turn gives the motion to the third, and so on throughout the entire 
number, until _B_ is reached. But _B_ has no ball to give its motion 
to, hence _B_ itself moves outward, and moves with a force nearly 
equal to that originally imparted by _A_ and to a distance nearly 
equal to that through which _A_ fell. Motion at _A_ is transmitted to 
_B_ without any perceptible motion of the balls lying between these 
points. Similarly the particles of air set into motion by a sounding 
body impart their motion to each other, the motion being transmitted 
onward without any perceptible motion of the air itself. When this 
motion reaches the ear, it sets the drum of the ear into vibration, 
and these vibrations are in turn transmitted to the auditory nerves, 
which interpret the motion as sound. 

[Illustration: FIG. 169.--Elastic balls transmit motion.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 170.--When a ball meets more than one ball, it 
divides its motion.] 

253. Why Sound dies away with Distance. Since the last ball _B_ is 
driven outward with a force nearly equal to that possessed by _A_, it 
would seem that the effect on the ear drum should be independent of 
distance and that a sound should be heard as distinctly when remote as 
when near. But we know from experience that this is not true, because 
the more distant the source of sound, the fainter the impression; and 
finally, if the distance between the source of sound and the hearer 
becomes too great, the sound disappears entirely and nothing is heard. 
The explanation of this well-known fact is found in a further study of 
the elastic balls (Fig. 170). If _A_ hits two balls instead of one, 
the energy possessed by _A_ is given in part to one ball, and in part 
to the other, so that neither obtains the full amount. These balls, 
having each received less than the original energy, have less to 
transmit; each of these balls in turn meets with others, and hence the 
motion becomes more and more distributed, and distant balls receive 
less and less impetus. The energy finally given becomes too slight to 
affect neighboring balls, and the system comes to rest. This is what 
occurs in the atmosphere; a moving air particle meets not one but many 
adjacent air particles, and each of these receives a portion of the 
original energy and transmits a portion. When the original disturbance 
becomes scattered over a large number of air particles, the energy 
given to any one air particle becomes correspondingly small, and 
finally the energy becomes so small that further particles are not 
affected; beyond this limit the sound cannot be heard. 

If an air particle transmitted motion only to those air particles 
directly in line with it, we should not be able to detect sound unless 
the ear were in direct line with the source. The fact that an air 
particle divides its motion among all particles which it touches, that 
==========
is, among those on the sides as well as those in front, makes it 
possible to hear sound in all directions. A good speaker is heard not 
only by those directly in front of him, but by those on the side, and 
even behind him. 

254. Velocity of Sound. The transmission of motion from particle to 
particle does not occur instantaneously, but requires time. If the 
distance is short, so that few air particles are involved, the time 
required for transmission is very brief, and the sound is heard at 
practically the instant it is made. Ordinarily we are not conscious 
that it requires time for sound to travel from its source to our ears, 
because the distance involved is too short. At other times we 
recognize that there is a delay; for example, thunder reaches our ears 
after the lightning which caused the thunder has completely 
disappeared. If the storm is near, the interval of time between the 
lightning and the thunder is brief, because the sound does not have 
far to travel; if the storm is distant, the interval is much longer, 
corresponding to the greater distance through which the sound travels. 
Sound does not move instantaneously, but requires time for its 
transmission. The report of a distant cannon is heard after the flash 
and smoke are seen; the report of a near cannon is heard the instant 
the flash is seen. 

The speed with which sounds travels through the air, or its velocity, 
was first measured by noting the interval (54.6 seconds) which elapsed 
between the flash of a cannon and the sound of the report. The 
distance of the cannon from the observer was measured and found to be 
61,045 feet, and by dividing this distance by the number of seconds, 
we find that the distance traveled by sound in one second is 
approximately 1118 feet. 

High notes and low notes, soft notes and shrill notes, all travel at 
the same rate. If bass notes traveled faster or slower than soprano 
notes, or if the delicate tones of the violin traveled faster or 
slower than the tones of a drum, music would be practically 
impossible, because at a distance from the source of sound the various 
tones which should be in unison would be out of time--some arriving 
late, some early. 

255. Sound Waves. Practically everyone knows that a hammock hung 
==========
with long ropes swings or vibrates more slowly than one hung with 
short ropes, and that a stone suspended by a long string swings more 
slowly than one suspended by a short string. No two rocking chairs 
vibrate in the same way unless they are exactly alike in shape, size, 
and material. An object when disturbed vibrates in a manner peculiar 
to itself, the vibration being slow, as in the case of the long-roped 
swing, or quick, as in the case of the short-roped swing. The time 
required for a single swing or vibration is called the _period_ of the 
body, and everything that can vibrate has a characteristic period. 
Size and shape determine to a large degree the period of a body; for 
example, a short, thick tuning fork vibrates more rapidly than a tall 
slender fork. 

[Illustration: FIG. 171.--The two hammocks swing differently.] 

Some tuning forks when struck vibrate so rapidly that the prongs move 
back and forth more than 5000 times per second, while other tuning 
forks vibrate so slowly that the vibrations do not exceed 50 per 
second. In either case the distance through which the prongs move is 
very small and the period is very short, so that the eye can seldom 
detect the movement itself. That the prongs are in motion, however, is 
seen by the action of a pith ball when brought in contact with the 
prongs (see Section 250). 

[Illustration: FIG. 172.--The pitch given out by a fork depends upon 
its shape.] 

The disturbance created by a vibrating body is called a wave. 

256. Waves. While the disturbance which travels out from a sounding 
body is commonly called a wave, it is by no means like the type of 
wave best known to us, namely, the water wave. 

If a closely coiled heavy wire is suspended as in Figure 173 and the 
weight is drawn down and then released, the coil will assume the 
appearance shown; there is clearly an overcrowding or condensation in 
some places, and a spreading out or rarefaction in other places. The 
pulse of condensation and rarefaction which travels the length of the 
wire is called a wave, although it bears little or no resemblance to 
the familiar water wave. Sound waves are similar to the waves formed 
in the stretched coil. 

[Illustration: FIG. 173.--Waves in a coiled wire.] 

Sound waves may be said to consist of a series of condensations and 
rarefactions, and the distance between two consecutive condensations 
and rarefactions may be defined as the wave length. 

257. How One Sounding Body produces Sound in Another Body. In 
Section 255 we saw that any object when disturbed vibrates in a manner 
peculiar to itself,--its natural period,--a long-roped hammock 
vibrating slowly and a short-roped hammock vibrating rapidly. From 
observation we learn that it requires but little force to cause a body 
to vibrate in its natural period. If a sounding body is near a body 
==========
which has the same period as itself, the pulses of air produced by the 
sounding body will, although very small, set the second body into 
motion and cause it to make a faint sound. When a piano is being 
played, we are often startled to find that a window pane or an 
ornament responds to some note of the piano. If two tuning forks of 
exactly identical periods (that is, of the same frequency) are placed 
on a table as in Figure 174, and one is struck so as to give forth a 
clear sound, the second fork will likewise vibrate, even though the 
two forks may be separated by several feet of air. We can readily see 
that the second fork is in motion, although it has not been struck, 
because it will set in motion a pith ball suspended beside it; at 
first the pith ball does not move, then it moves slightly, and finally 
bounces rapidly back and forth. If the periods of the two forks are 
not identical, but differ in the slightest degree, the second fork 
will not respond to the first fork, no matter how long or how loud the 
sound of the first fork. If we suppose that the fork vibrates 256 
times each second, then 256 gentle pulses of air are produced each 
second, and these, traveling outward through the air, reach the silent 
fork and tend to set it in motion. A single pulse of air could not 
move the solid, heavy prongs, but the accumulated action of 256 
vibrations per second soon makes itself felt, and the second fork 
begins to vibrate, at first gently, then gradually stronger, and 
finally an audible tone is given forth. 

[Illustration: FIG. 174.--When the first fork vibrates, the second 
responds.] 

The cumulative power of feeble forces acting frequently at definite 
intervals is seen in many ways in everyday life. A small boy can 
easily swing a much larger boy, provided he gives the swing a gentle 
push in the right direction every time it passes him. But he must be 
careful to push at the proper instant, since otherwise his effort does 
not count for much; if he pushes forward when the swing is moving 
backward, he really hinders the motion; if he waits until the swing 
has moved considerably forward, his push counts for little. He must 
push at the proper instant; that is, the way in which his hand moves 
in giving the push must correspond exactly with the way in which the 
swing would naturally vibrate. A very striking experiment can be made 
by suspending from the ceiling a heavy weight and striking this weight 
gently at regular, properly timed intervals with a small cork hammer. 
Soon the pendulum, or weight, will be set swinging. 

[Illustration: FIG. 175.--The hollow wooden box re??nforces the sound.] 

258. Borrowed Sound. Picture frames and ornaments sometimes buzz and 
give forth faint murmurs when a piano or organ is played. The waves 
sent out by a sounding body fall upon all surrounding objects and by 
their repeated action tend to throw these bodies into vibration. If 
the period of any one of the objects corresponds with the period of 
the sounding body, the gentle but frequent impulses affect the object, 
which responds by emitting a sound. If, however, the periods do not 
==========
correspond, the action of the sound waves is not sufficiently powerful 
to throw the object into vibration, and no sound is heard. Bodies 
which respond in this way are said to be sympathetic and the response 
produced is called _resonance_. Seashells when held to the ear seem to 
contain the roar of the sea; this is because the air within the shell 
is set into sympathetic vibrations by some external tone. If the 
seashell were held to the ear in an absolutely quiet room, no sound 
would be heard, because there would be no external forces to set into 
vibration the air within the shell. 

Tuning forks do not produce strong tones unless mounted on hollow 
wooden boxes (Fig. 175), whose size and shape are so adjusted that 
resonance occurs and strengthens the sound. When a human being talks 
or sings, the air within the mouth cavity is thrown into sympathetic 
vibration and strengthens the otherwise feeble tone of the speaker. 

259. Echo. If one shouts in a forest, the sound is sometimes heard a 
second time a second or two later. This is because sound is reflected 
when it strikes a large obstructing surface. If the sound waves 
resulting from the shout meet a cliff or a mountain, they are 
reflected back, and on reaching the ear produce a later sensation of 
sound. 

By observation it has been found that the ear cannot distinguish 
sounds which are less than one tenth of a second apart; that is, if 
two sounds follow each other at an interval less than one tenth of a 
second, the ear recognizes not two sounds, but one. This explains why 
a speaker can be heard better indoors than in the open air. In the 
average building, the walls are so close that the reflected waves have 
but a short distance to travel, and hence reach the ear at practically 
the same time as those which come directly from the speaker. In the 
open, there are no reflecting walls or surfaces, and the original 
sound has no re??nforcement from reflection. 

If the reflected waves reach the ear too late to blend with the 
original sound, that is, come later than one tenth of a second after 
the first impression, an echo is heard. What we call the rolling of 
thunder is really the reflection and re-reflection of the original 
thunder from cloud and cliff. 

Some halls are so large that the reflected sounds cause a confusion of 
echoes, but this difficulty can be lessened by hanging draperies, 
which break the reflection. 

260. Motion does not always produce Sound. While we know that all 
sound can be traced to motion, we know equally well that motion does 
not always produce sound. The hammock swinging in the breeze does not 
give forth a sound; the flag floating in the air does not give forth a 
sound unless blown violently by the wind; a card moved slowly through 
the air does not produce sound, but if the card is moved rapidly back 
and forth, a sound becomes audible. 

Motion, in order to produce sound, must be rapid; a ball attached to a 
string and moved slowly through the air produces no sound, but the 
same ball, whirled rapidly, produces a distinct buzz, which becomes 
stronger and stronger the faster the ball is whirled. 

261. Noise and Music. When the rapid motions which produce sound are 
irregular, we hear noise; when the motions are regular and definite, 
we have a musical tone; the rattling of carriage wheels on stones, the 
roar of waves, the rustling of leaves are noise, not music. In all 
these illustrations we have rapid but irregular motion; no two stones 
strike the wheel in exactly the same way, no two waves produce pulses 
in the air of exactly the same character, no two leaves rustle in 
precisely the same way. The disturbances which reach the ear from 
carriage, waves, and leaves are irregular both in time and strength, 
and irritate the ear, causing the sensation which we call noise. 

The tuning fork is musical. Here we have rapid, regular motion; 
vibrations follow each other at perfectly definite intervals, and the 
air disturbance produced by one vibration is exactly like the 
disturbance produced by a later vibration. The sound waves which reach 
the ear are regular in time and kind and strength, and we call the 
sensation music. 

To produce noise a body must vibrate in such a way as to give short, 
quick shocks to the air; to produce music a body must not only impart 
short, quick shocks to the air, but must impart these shocks with 
unerring regularity and strength. A flickering light irritates the 
eye; a flickering sound or noise irritates the ear; both are painful 
because of the sudden and abrupt changes in effect which they cause, 
the former on the eye, the latter on the ear. 

The only thing essential for the production of a musical sound is that 
the waves which reach the ear shall be rapid and regular; it is 
==========
immaterial how these waves are produced. If a toothed wheel is mounted 
and slowly rotated, and a stiff card is held against the teeth of the 
wheel, a distinct tap is heard every time the card strikes the wheel. 
But if the wheel is rotated rapidly, the ear ceases to hear the 
various taps and recognizes a deep continuous musical tone. The 
blending of the individual taps, occurring at regular intervals, has 
produced a sustained musical tone. A similar result is obtained if a 
card is drawn slowly and then rapidly over the teeth of a comb. 

[Illustration: FIG. 176.--A rotating disk.] 

That musical tones are due to a succession of regularly timed impulses 
is shown most clearly by means of a rotating disk on which are cut two 
sets of holes, the outer set equally spaced, and the inner set 
unequally spaced (Fig. 176). 

If, while the disk is rotating rapidly, a tube is held over the 
outside row and air is blown through the tube, a sustained musical 
tone will be heard. If, however, the tube is held, during the rotation 
of the disk, over the inner row of unequally spaced holes, the musical 
tone disappears, and a series of noises take its place. In the first 
case, the separate puffs of air followed each other regularly and 
blended into one tone; in the second case, the separate puffs of air 
followed each other at uncertain and irregular intervals and the 
result was noise. 

Sound possesses a musical quality only when the waves or pulses follow 
each other at absolutely regular intervals. 

262. The Effect of the Rapidity of Motion on the Musical Tone 
Produced. If the disk is rotated so slowly that less than about 16 
==========
puffs are produced in one second, only separate puffs are heard, and a 
musical tone is lacking; if, on the other hand, the disk is rotated in 
such a way that 16 puffs or more are produced in one second, the 
separate puffs will blend together to produce a continuous musical 
note of very low pitch. If the speed of the disk is increased so that 
the puffs become more frequent, the pitch of the resulting note rises; 
and at very high speeds the notes produced become so shrill and 
piercing as to be disagreeable to the ear. If the speed of the disk is 
lessened, the pitch falls correspondingly; and if the speed again 
becomes so low that less than 16 puffs are formed per second, the 
sustained sound disappears and a series of intermittent noises is 
produced. 

263. The Pitch of a Note. By means of an apparatus called the siren, 
it is possible to calculate the number of vibrations producing any 
given musical note, such, for example, as middle C on the piano. If 
air is forced continuously against the disk as it rotates, a series of 
puffs will be heard (Fig. 177). 

If the disk turns fast enough, the puffs blend into a musical sound, 
whose pitch rises higher and higher as the disk moves faster and 
faster, and produces more and more puffs each second. 

The instrument is so constructed that clockwork at the top registers 
the number of revolutions made by the disk in one second. The number 
of holes in the disk multiplied by the number of revolutions a second 
gives the number of puffs of air produced in one second. If we wish to 
find the number of vibrations which correspond to middle C on the 
piano, we increase the speed of the disk until the note given forth by 
the siren agrees with middle C as sounded on the piano, as nearly as 
the ear can judge; we then calculate the number of puffs of air which 
took place each second at that particular speed of the disk. In this 
way we find that middle C is due to about 256 vibrations per second; 
that is, a piano string must vibrate 256 times per second in order for 
the resultant note to be of pitch middle C. In a similar manner we 
determine the following frequencies:-- 

|do |re |mi |fa |sol |la |si |do | 
|C |D |E |F |G |A |B |C' | 
|256 |288 |320 |341 |384 |427 |480 |512 | 

[Illustration: FIG. 177.--A siren.] 

The pitch of pianos, from the lowest bass note to the very highest 
treble, varies from 27 to about 3500 vibrations per second. No human 
voice, however, has so great a range of tone; the highest soprano 
notes of women correspond to but 1000 vibrations a second, and the 
deepest bass of men falls but to 80 vibrations a second. 

While the human voice is limited in its production of sound,--rarely 
falling below 80 vibrations a second and rarely exceeding 1000 
vibrations a second,--the ear is by no means limited to that range in 
hearing. The chirrup of a sparrow, the shrill sound of a cricket, and 
the piercing shrieks of a locomotive are due to far greater 
frequencies, the number of vibrations at times equaling 38,000 per 
second or more. 

264. The Musical Scale. When we talk, the pitch of the voice changes 
constantly and adds variety and beauty to conversation; a speaker 
whose tone, or pitch, remains too constant is monotonous and dull, no 
matter how brilliant his thoughts may be. 

While the pitch of the voice changes constantly, the changes are 
==========
normally gradual and slight, and the different tones merge into each 
other imperceptibly. In music, however, there is a well-defined 
interval between even consecutive notes; for example, in the musical 
scale, middle C (do) with 256 vibrations is followed by D (re) with 
288 vibrations, and the interval between these notes is sharp and well 
marked, even to an untrained ear. The interval between two notes is 
defined as the ratio of the frequencies; hence, the interval between C 
and D (do and re) is 288/256, or 9/8. Referring to Section 263, we see 
that the interval between C and E is 320/256, or 5/4, and the interval 
between C and C' is 512/256, or 2; the interval between any note and 
its octave is 2. 

The successive notes in one octave of the musical scale are related as 
follows:-- 

|Key of C |C |D |E |F |G |A |B |C' | 
|No. of vibrations | | | | | | | | | 
|per sec. |256 |288 |320 |341 |384 |427 |480 |512 | 
|Interval |9/8 |5/4 |4/3 |3/2 |5/3 |15/8 |2 | | 

The intervals of F and A are not strictly 4/3 and 5/3, but are nearly 
so; if F made 341.3 vibrations per second instead of 341; and if A 
made 426.6 instead of 427, then the intervals would be exactly 4/3 and 
5/3. Since the real difference is so slight, we can assume the simpler 
ratios without appreciable error. 

Any eight notes whose frequencies are in the ratio of 9/8, 5/4, etc., 
will when played in succession give the familiar musical scale; for 
example, the deepest bass voice starts a musical scale whose notes 
have the frequencies 80, 90, 100, 107, 120, 133, 150, 160, but the 
intervals here are identical with those of a higher scale; the 
interval between C and D, 80 and 90, is 9/8, just as it was before 
when the frequencies were much greater; that is, 256 and 288. In 
singing "Home, Sweet Home," for example, a bass voice may start with a 
note vibrating only 132 times a second; while a tenor may start at a 
higher pitch, with a note vibrating 198 times per second, and a 
soprano would probably take a much higher range still, with an initial 
frequency of 528 vibrations per second. But no matter where the voices 
start, the intervals are always identical. The air as sung by the bass 
voice would be represented by _A_. The air as sung by the tenor voice 
would be represented by _B_. The air as sung by the soprano voice 
would be represented by _C_. 

[Illustration: FIG. 178.--A song as sung by three voices of different 
pitch.] 




CHAPTER XXVIII 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


265. Musical instruments maybe divided into three groups according 
to the different ways in which their tones are produced:-- 

==========
_First._ The stringed instruments in which sound is produced by the 
vibration of stretched strings, as in the piano, violin, guitar, 
mandolin. 

_Second._ The wind instruments in which sound is produced by the 
vibrations of definite columns of air, as in the organ, flute, cornet, 
trombone. 

_Third._ The percussion instruments, in which sound is produced by the 
motion of stretched membranes, as in the drum, or by the motion of 
metal disks, as in the tambourines and cymbals. 

266. Stringed Instruments. If the lid of a piano is opened, numerous 
wires are seen within; some long, some short, some coarse, some fine. 
Beneath each wire is a small felt hammer connected with the keys in 
such a way that when a key is pressed, a string is struck by a hammer 
and is thrown into vibration, thereby producing a tone. 

If we press the lowest key, that is, the key giving forth the lowest 
pitch, we see that the longest wire is struck and set into vibration; 
if we press the highest key, that is, the key giving the highest 
pitch, we see that the shortest wire is struck. In addition, it is 
seen that the short wires which produce the high tones are fine, 
while the long wires which produce the low tones are coarse. The 
shorter and finer the wire, the higher the pitch of the tone produced. 
The longer and coarser the wire, the lower the pitch of the tone 
produced. 

[Illustration: FIG. 179.--Piano wires seen from the back.] 

==========
The constant striking of the hammers against the strings stretches and 
loosens them and alters their pitch; for this reason each string is 
fastened to a screw which can be turned so as to tighten the string or 
to loosen it if necessary. The tuning of the piano is the adjustment 
of the strings so that each shall produce a tone of the right pitch. 
When the strings are tightened, the pitch rises; when the strings are 
loosened, the pitch falls. 

What has been said of the piano applies as well to the violin, guitar, 
and mandolin. In the latter instruments the strings are few in number, 
generally four, as against eighty-eight in the piano; the hammer of 
the piano is replaced in the violin by the bow, and in the guitar by 
the fingers; varying pitches on any one string are obtained by sliding 
a finger of the left hand along the wire, and thus altering its 
length. 

Frequent tuning is necessary, because the fine adjustments are easily 
disturbed. The piano is the best protected of all the stringed 
instruments, being inclosed by a heavy framework, even when in use. 

[Illustration: FIG. 180.--Front view of an open piano.] 

267. Strings and their Tones. Fasten a violin string to a wooden 
frame or box, as shown in Figure 181, stretching it by means of some 
convenient weight; then lay a yardstick along the box in order that 
the lengths may be determined accurately. If the stretched string is 
plucked with the fingers or bowed with the violin bow, a clear musical 
sound of definite pitch will be produced. Now divide the string into 
two equal parts by inserting the bridge midway between the two ends; 
and pluck either half as before. The note given forth is of a 
decidedly higher pitch, and if by means of the siren we compare the 
pitches in the two cases, we find that the note sounded by the half 
wire is the octave of the note sounded by the entire wire; the 
frequency has been doubled by halving the length. If now the bridge is 
placed so that the string is divided into two unequal portions such as 
1:3 and 2:3, and the shorter portion is plucked, the pitch will be 
still higher; the shorter the length plucked, the higher the pitch 
produced. This movable bridge corresponds to the finger of the 
violinist; the finger slides back and forth along the string, thus 
changing the length of the bowed portion and producing variations in 
pitch. 

[Illustration: FIG. 181.--The length of a string influences the 
pitch.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 182.--Only one half of the string is bowed, but 
both halves vibrate.] 

If there were but one string, only one pitch could be sounded at any 
==========
one time; the additional strings of the violin allow of the 
simultaneous production of several tones. 

268. The Freedom of a String. Some stringed instruments give forth 
tones which are clear and sweet, but withal thin and lacking in 
richness and fullness. The tones sounded by two different strings may 
agree in pitch and loudness and yet produce quite different effects on 
the ear, because in one case the tone may be much more pleasing than 
in the other. The explanation of this is, that a string may vibrate in 
a number of different ways. 

Touch the middle of a wire with the finger or a pencil (Fig. 182), 
thus separating it into two portions and draw a violin bow across the 
center of either half. Only one half of the entire string is struck, 
but the motion of this half is imparted to the other half and throws 
it into similar motion, and if a tiny A-shaped piece of paper or rider 
is placed upon the unbowed half, it is hurled off. 

[Illustration: FIG. 183.--The string vibrates in three portions.] 

If the wire is touched at a distance of one third its length and a bow 
is drawn across the middle of the smaller portion, the string will 
vibrate in three parts; we cannot always see these various motions in 
different parts of the string, but we know of their existence through 
the action of the riders. 

Similarly, touching the wire one fourth of its length from an end 
makes it vibrate in four segments; touching it one fifth of its length 
makes it vibrate in five segments. 

In the first case, the string vibrated as a whole string and also as 
two strings of half the length; hence, three tones must have been 
given out, one tone due to the entire string and two tones due to the 
segments. But we saw in Section 267 that halving the length of a 
string doubles the pitch of the resulting tone, and produces the 
octave of the original tone; hence a string vibrating as in Figure 183 
gives forth three tones, one of which is the fundamental tone of the 
string, and two of which are the octave of the fundamental tone. 
Hence, the vibrating string produces two sensations, that of the 
fundamental note and of its octave. 

[Illustration: FIG. 184.--When a string vibrates as a whole, it gives 
out the fundamental note.] 

When a string is plucked in the middle without being held, it vibrates 
simply as a whole (Fig. 184), and gives forth but one note; this is 
called the fundamental. If the string is made to vibrate in two parts, 
it gives forth two notes, the fundamental, and a note one octave 
higher than the fundamental; this is called the first overtone. When 
the string is made to move as in Figure 183, three distinct motions 
are called forth, the motion of the entire string, the motion of the 
portion plucked, and the motion of the remaining unplucked portion of 
the string. Here, naturally, different tones arise, corresponding to 
the different modes of vibration. The note produced by the vibration 
of one third of the original string is called the second overtone. 

The above experiments show that a string is able to vibrate in a 
number of different ways at the same time, and to emit simultaneously 
a number of different tones; also that the resulting complex sound 
consists of the fundamental and one or more overtones, and that the 
number of overtones present depends upon how and where the string is 
plucked. 

[Illustration: FIG. 185.--A string can vibrate in a number of 
different ways simultaneously, and can produce different notes 
simultaneously.] 

269. The Value of Overtones. The presence of overtones determines 
the quality of the sound produced. If the string vibrates as a whole 
merely, the tone given out is simple, and seems dull and 
characterless. If, on the other hand, it vibrates in such a way that 
overtones are present, the tone given forth is full and rich and the 
sensation is pleasing. A tuning fork cannot vibrate in more than one 
way, and hence has no overtones, and its tone, while clear and sweet, 
is far less pleasing than the same note produced by a violin or piano. 
The untrained ear is not conscious of overtones and recognizes only 
the strong dominant fundamental. The overtones blend in with the 
fundamental and are so inconspicuously present that we do not realize 
their existence; it is only when they are absent that we become aware 
of the beauty which they add to the music. A song played on tuning 
forks instead of on strings would be lifeless and unsatisfying because 
of the absence of overtones. 

It is not necessary to hold finger or pencil at the points 1:3, 1:4, 
etc., in order to cause the string to vibrate in various ways; if a 
string is merely plucked or bowed at those places, the result will be 
the same. It is important to remember that no matter where a string of 
definite length is bowed, the note most distinctly heard will be the 
fundamental; but the quality of the emitted tone will vary with the 
bowing. For example, if a string is bowed in the middle, the effect 
will be far less pleasing than though it were bowed near the end. In 
the piano, the hammers are arranged so as to strike near one end of 
the string, at a distance of about 1:7 to 1:9; and hence a large 
number of overtones combine to re??nforce and enrich the fundamental 
tone. 

270. The Individuality of Instruments. It has been shown that a 
piano string when struck by a hammer, or a violin string when bowed, 
or a mandolin string when plucked, vibrates not only as a whole, but 
also in segments, and as a result gives forth not a simple tone, as we 
are accustomed to think, but a very complex tone consisting of the 
fundamental and one or more overtones. If the string whose fundamental 
note is lower C (128 vibrations per second) is thrown into vibration, 
the tone produced may contain, in addition to the prominent 
==========
fundamental, any one or more of the following overtones: C', G'', C'', 
E'', C''', etc. 

The number of overtones actually present depends upon a variety of 
circumstances: in the piano, it depends largely upon the location of 
the hammer; in the violin, upon the place and manner of bowing. 
Mechanical differences in construction account for prominent and 
numerous overtones in some instruments and for feeble and few 
overtones in others. The oboe, for example, is so constructed that 
only the high overtones are present, and hence the sound gives a 
"pungent" effect; the clarinet is so constructed that the 
even-numbered overtones are killed, and the presence of only 
odd-numbered overtones gives individuality to the instrument. In these 
two instruments we have vibrating air columns instead of vibrating 
strings, but the laws which govern vibrating strings are applicable to 
vibrating columns of air, as we shall see later. It is really the 
presence or absence of overtones which enables us to distinguish the 
note of the piano from that of the violin, flute, or clarinet. If 
overtones could be eliminated, then middle C, or any other note on the 
piano, would be indistinguishable from that same note sounded on any 
other instrument. The fundamental note in every instrument is the 
same, but the overtones vary with the instrument and lend 
individuality to each. The presence of high overtones in the oboe and 
the presence of odd-numbered overtones in the clarinet enable us to 
distinguish without fail the sounds given out by these instruments. 

The richness and individuality of an instrument are due, not only to 
the overtones which accompany the fundamental, but also to the 
"forced" vibrations of the inclosing case, or of the sounding board. 
If a vibrating tuning fork is held in the hand, the sound will be 
inaudible except to those quite near; if, however, the base of the 
fork is held against the table, the sound is greatly intensified and 
becomes plainly audible throughout the room. 

The vibrations of the fork are transmitted to the table top and throw 
it into vibrations similar to its own, and these additional vibrations 
intensify the original sound. Any fork, no matter what its frequency, 
can force the surface of the table into vibration, and hence the sound 
of any fork will be intensified by contact with a table or box. 

This is equally true of strings; if stretched between two posts and 
bowed, the sound given out by a string is feeble, but if stretched 
over a sounding board, as in the piano, or over a wooden shell, as in 
the violin, the sound is intensified. Any note of the instrument will 
force the sounding body to vibrate, thus re??nforcing the volume of 
sound, but some tones, or modes of vibration, do this more easily than 
others, and while the sounding board or shell always responds, it 
responds in varying degree. Here again we have not only enrichment of 
sound but also individuality of instruments. 
==========

271. The Kinds of Stringed Instruments. Stringed instruments may be 
grouped in the following three classes:-- 

_a_. Instruments in which the strings are set into motion by 
hammers--piano. 

_b_. Instruments in which the strings are set into motion by 
bowing--violin, viola, violoncello, double bass. 

_c_. Instruments in which the strings are set into motion by 
plucking--harp, guitar, mandolin. 

[Illustration: FIG. 186.--1, violin; 2, viola; 3, violoncello; 4, 
double bass.] 

_a_. The piano is too well known to need comment. In 
passing, it may be mentioned that in the construction of the 
modern concert piano approximately 40,000 separate pieces of 
material are used. The large number of pieces is due, 
partly, to the fact that the single string corresponding to 
any one key is usually replaced by no less than three or 
four similar strings in order that greater volume of sound 
may be obtained. The hammer connected to a key strikes 
four or more strings instead of one, and hence produces a 
greater volume of tone. 
==========

_b_. The viola is larger than the violin, has heavier and 
thicker strings, and is pitched to a lower key; in all other 
respects the two are similar. The violoncello, because of 
the length and thickness of its strings, is pitched a whole 
octave lower than the violin; otherwise it is similar. The 
unusual length and thickness of the strings of the double 
bass make it produce very low notes, so that it is 
ordinarily looked upon as the "bass voice" of the orchestra. 

_c_. The harp has always been considered one of the most 
pleasing and perfect of musical instruments. Here the 
skilled performer has absolutely free scope for his genius, 
because his fingers can pluck the strings at will and hence 
regulate the overtones, and his feet can regulate at will 
the tension, and hence the pitch of the strings. 

Guitar and mandolin are agreeable instruments for amateurs, 
but are never used in orchestral music. 

[Illustration: FIG. 187.--A harp.] 

272. Wind Instruments. In the so-called wind instruments, sound is 
==========
produced by vibrating columns of air inclosed in tubes or pipes of 
different lengths. The air column is thrown into vibration either 
directly, by blowing across a narrow opening at one end of a pipe as 
in the case of the whistle, or indirectly, by exciting vibrations in a 
thin strip of wood or metal, called a reed, which in turn communicates 
its vibrations to the air column within. 

The shorter the air column, the higher the pitch. This agrees with the 
law of vibrating strings which gives high pitches for short lengths. 

[Illustration: FIG. 188.--Open organ pipes of different pitch.] 

The pitch of the sound emitted by a column of air vibrating within a 
pipe varies according to the following laws: 

1. The shorter the pipe, the higher the pitch. 

2. The pitch of a note emitted by an open pipe is one octave higher 
than that of a closed pipe of equal length. 

3. Air columns vibrate in segments just as do strings, and the tone 
emitted by a pipe of given length is complex, consisting of the 
fundamental and one or more overtones. The greater the number of 
overtones present, the richer the tone produced. 

273. How the Various Pitches are Produced. With a pipe of fixed 
length, for example, the clarinet (Fig. 189, 1), different pitches are 
obtained by pressing keys which open holes in the tube and thus 
shorten or lengthen the vibrating air column and produce a rise or 
fall in pitch. Changes in pitch are also produced by variation in the 
player's breathing. By blowing hard or gently, the number of 
vibrations of the reed is increased or decreased and hence the pitch 
is altered. 

[Illustration: FIG. 189--1, clarinet; 2, oboe; 3, flute.] 

In the oboe (Fig. 189, 2) the vibrating air column is set into motion 
by means of two thin pieces of wood or metal placed in the mouthpiece 
of the tube. Variations in pitch are produced as in the clarinet by 
means of stops and varied breathing. In the flute, the air is set into 
motion by direct blowing from the mouth, as is done, for instance, 
when we blow into a bottle or key. 

The sound given out by organ pipes is due to air blown across a sharp 
edge at the opening of a narrow tube. The air forced across the sharp 
edge is thrown into vibration and communicates its vibration to the 
air within the organ pipe. For different pitches, pipes of different 
lengths are used: for very low pitches long, closed pipes are used; 
for very high pitches short, open pipes are used. The mechanism of the 
organ is such that pressing a key allows the air to rush into the 
communicating pipe and a sound is produced characteristic of the 
==========
length of the pipe. 

[Illustration: FIG. 190.--1, horn; 2, trumpet; 3, trombone.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 191.--1, kettledrum; 2, bass drum; 3, cymbals.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 192.--The seating arrangement of the Philadelphia 
orchestra.] 

In the brass wind instruments such as horn, trombone, and trumpet, the 
lips of the player vibrate and excite the air within. Varying pitches 
are obtained partly by the varying wind pressure of the musician; if 
he breathes fast, the pitch rises; if he breathes slowly, the pitch 
falls. All of these instruments, however, except the trombone possess 
some valves which, on being pressed, vary the length of the tube and 
alter the pitch accordingly. In the trombone, valves are replaced by a 
section which slides in and out and shortens or lengthens the tube. 

274. The Percussion Instruments. The percussion instruments, 
including kettledrums, bass drums, and cymbals, are the least 
important of all the musical instruments; and are usually of service 
merely in adding to the excitement and general effect of an orchestra. 

In orchestral music the various instruments are grouped somewhat as 
shown in Figure 192. 




CHAPTER XXIX 

SPEAKING AND HEARING 


==========
[Illustration: FIG. 193.--The vibration of the vocal cords produces 
the sound of the human voice.] 

275. Speech. The human voice is the most perfect of musical 
instruments. Within the throat, two elastic bands are attached to the 
windpipe at the place commonly called Adam's apple; these flexible 
bands have received the name of vocal cords, since by their vibration 
all speech is produced. In ordinary breathing, the cords are loose and 
are separated by a wide opening through which air enters and leaves 
the lungs. When we wish to speak, muscular effort stretches the cords, 
draws them closer together, and reduces the opening between them to a 
narrow slit, as in the case of the organ pipe. If air from the lungs 
is sent through the narrow slit, the vocal cords or bands are thrown 
into rapid vibration and produce sound. The pitch of the sound depends 
upon the tension of the stretched membranes, and since this can be 
altered by muscular action, the voice can be modulated at will. In 
times of excitement, when the muscles of the body in general are in a 
state of great tension, the pitch is likely to be uncommonly high. 

Women's voices are higher than men's because the vocal cords are 
shorter and finer; even though muscular tension is relaxed and the 
cords are made looser, the pitch of a woman's voice does not fall so 
low as that of a man's voice since his cords are naturally much 
longer and coarser. The difference between a soprano and an alto voice 
is merely one of length and tension of the vocal cords. 

Successful singing is possible only when the vocal cords are readily 
flexible and when the singer can supply a steady, continuous blast of 
air through the slit between the cords. The hoarseness which 
frequently accompanies cold in the head is due to the thickening of 
the mucous membrane and to the filling up of the slit with mucus, 
because when this happens, the vocal cords cannot vibrate properly. 

The sounds produced by the vocal cords are transformed into speech by 
the help of the tongue and lips, which modify the shape of the mouth 
cavity. Some of the lower animals have a speaking apparatus similar to 
our own, but they cannot perfectly transform sound into speech. The 
birds use their vocal cords to beautiful advantage in singing, far 
surpassing us in many ways, but the power of speech is lacking. 

==========
276. The Ear. The pulses created in the air by a sounding body are 
received by the ear and the impulses which they impart to the auditory 
nerve pass to the brain and we become conscious of a sound. The ear is 
capable of marvelous discrimination and accuracy. "In order to form an 
idea of the extent of this power imagine an auditor in a large music 
hall where a full band and chorus are performing. Here, there are 
sounds mingled together of all varieties of pitch, loudness, and 
quality; stringed instruments, wood instruments, brass instruments, 
and voices, of many different kinds. And in addition to these there 
may be all sorts of accidental and irregular sounds and noises, such 
as the trampling and shuffling of feet, the hum of voices, the rustle 
of dress, the creaking of doors, and many others. Now it must be 
remembered that the only means the ear has of becoming aware of these 
simultaneous sounds is by the condensations and rarefactions which 
reach it; and yet when the sound wave meets the nerves, the nerves 
single out each individual element, and convey to the mind of the 
hearer, not only the tones and notes of every instrument in the 
orchestra, but the character of every accidental noise; and almost as 
distinctly as if each single tone or noise were heard alone."--POLE. 

[Illustration: FIG. 194.--The ear.] 

277. The Structure of the Ear. The external portion of the ear acts 
as a funnel for catching sound waves and leading them into the canal, 
where they strike upon the ear drum, or tympanic membrane, and throw 
it into vibration. Unless the ear drum is very flexible there cannot 
be perfect response to the sound waves which fall upon it; for this 
reason, the glands of the canal secrete a wax which moistens the 
membrane and keeps it flexible. Lying directly back of the tympanic 
membrane is a cavity filled with air which enters by the Eustachian 
tube; from the throat air enters the Eustachian tube, moves along it, 
and passes into the ear cavity. The dull crackling noise noticed in 
the ear when one swallows is due to the entrance and exit of air in 
the tube. Several small bones stretch across the upper portion of the 
cavity and make a bridge, so to speak, from the ear drum to the far 
wall of the cavity. It is by means of these three bones that the 
vibrations of the ear drum are transmitted to the inner wall of the 
cavity. Behind the first cavity is a second cavity so complex and 
irregular that it is called the labyrinth of the ear. This labyrinth 
is filled with a fluid in which are spread out the delicate sensitive 
fibers of the auditory nerves; and it is to these that the vibrations 
must be transmitted. 

Suppose a note of 800 vibrations per second is sung. Then 800 pulses 
of air will reach the ear each second, and the ear drum, being 
flexible, will respond and will vibrate at the same rate. The 
vibration of the ear drum will be transmitted by the three bones and 
the fluid to the fibers of the auditory nerves. The impulses imparted 
to the auditory nerve reach the brain and in some unknown way are 
translated into sound. 

278. Care of the Ear. Most catarrhal troubles are accompanied by an 
oversupply of mucus which frequently clogs up the Eustachian tube and 
produces deafness. For the same reason, colds and sore throat 
sometimes induce temporary deafness. 

The wax of the ear is essential for flexibility of the ear drum; if an 
extra amount accumulates, it can be got rid of by bathing the ear in 
==========
hot water, since the heat will melt the wax. The wax should never be 
picked out with pin or sharp object except by a physician, lest injury 
be done to the tympanic membrane. 

279. The Phonograph. The invention of the phonograph by Edison in 
1878 marked a new era in the popularity and dissemination of music. Up 
to that time, household music was limited to those who were rich 
enough to possess a real musical instrument, and who in addition had 
the understanding and the skill to use the instrument. The invention 
of the phonograph has brought music to thousands of homes possessed 
of neither wealth nor skill. That the music reproduced by a phonograph 
is not always of the highest order does not, in the least, detract 
from the interest and wonder of the instrument. It can reproduce what 
it is called upon to reproduce, and if human nature demands the 
commonplace, the instrument will be made to satisfy the demand. On the 
other hand, speeches of famous men, national songs, magnificent opera 
selections, and other pleasing and instructive productions can be 
reproduced fairly accurately. In this way the phonograph, perhaps more 
than any other recent invention, can carry to the "shut-ins" a lively 
glimpse of the outside world and its doings. 

==========
[Illustration: FIG. 195.--A vibrating tuning fork traces a curved line 
on smoked glass.] 

The phonograph consists of a cylinder or disk of wax upon which the 
vibrations of a sensitive diaphragm are recorded by means of a fine 
metal point. The action of the pointer in reporting the vibrations of 
a diaphragm is easily understood by reference to a tuning fork. Fasten 
a stiff bristle to a tuning fork by means of wax, allowing the end of 
the point to rest lightly upon a piece of smoked glass. If the glass 
is drawn under the bristle a straight line will be scratched on the 
glass, but if the tuning fork is struck so that the prongs vibrate 
back and forth, then the straight line changes to a wavy line and the 
type of wavy line depends upon the fork used. 

In the phonograph, a diaphragm replaces the tuning fork and a cylinder 
(or a disk) coated with wax replaces the glass plate. When the speaker 
talks or the singer sings, his voice strikes against a delicate 
diaphragm and throws it into vibration, and the metal point attached 
to it traces on the wax of a moving cylinder a groove of varying shape 
and appearance called the "record." Every variation in the speaker's 
voice is repeated in the vibrations of the metal disk and hence in the 
minute motion of the pointer and in the consequent record on the 
cylinder. The record thus made can be placed in any other phonograph 
and if the metal pointer of this new phonograph is made to pass over 
the tracing, the process is reversed and the speaker's voice is 
reproduced. The sound given out in the this way is faint and weak, but 
can be strengthened by means of a trumpet attached to the phonograph. 

[Illustration: FIG. 196.--A phonograph. In this machine the cylinder 
is replaced by a revolving disk.] 




CHAPTER XXX 

==========
ELECTRICITY 


280. Many animals possess the five senses, but only man possesses 
constructive, creative power, and is able to build on the information 
gained through the senses. It is the constructive, creative power 
which raises man above the level of the beast and enables him to 
devise and fashion wonderful inventions. Among the most important of 
his inventions are those which relate to electricity; inventions such 
as trolley car, elevator, automobile, electric light, the telephone, 
the telegraph. Bell, by his superior constructive ability, made 
possible the practical use of the telephone, and Marconi that of 
wireless telegraphy. To these inventions might be added many others 
which have increased the efficiency and production of the business 
world and have decreased the labor and strain of domestic life. 

[Illustration: FIG. 197.--A simple electric cell.] 

281. Electricity as first Obtained by Man. Until modern times the 
only electricity known to us was that of the lightning flash, which 
man could neither hinder nor make. But in the year 1800, electricity 
==========
in the form of a weak current was obtained by Volta of Italy in a very 
simple way; and even now our various electric batteries and cells are 
but a modification of that used by Volta and called a voltaic cell. A 
strip of copper and a strip of zinc are placed in a glass containing 
dilute sulphuric acid, a solution composed of oxygen, hydrogen, 
sulphur, and water. As soon as the plates are immersed in the acid 
solution, minute bubbles of gas rise from the zinc strip and it begins 
to waste away slowly. The solution gradually dissolves the zinc and at 
the same time gives up some of the hydrogen which it contains; but it 
has little or no effect on the copper, since there is no visible 
change in the copper strip. 

If, now, the strips are connected by means of metal wires, the zinc 
wastes away rapidly, numerous bubbles of hydrogen pass over to the 
copper strip and collect on it, and a current of electricity flows 
through the connecting wires. Evidently, the source of the current is 
the chemical action between the zinc and the liquid. 

Mere inspection of the connecting wire will not enable us to detect 
that a current is flowing, but there are various ways in which the 
current makes itself evident. If the ends of the wires attached to the 
strips are brought in contact with each other and then separated, a 
faint spark passes, and if the ends are placed on the tongue, a twinge 
is felt. 

282. Experiments which grew out of the Voltaic Cell. Since chemical 
action on the zinc is the source of the current, it would seem 
reasonable to expect a current if the cell consisted of two zinc 
plates instead of one zinc plate and one copper plate. But when the 
copper strip is replaced by a zinc strip so that the cell consists of 
two similar plates, no current flows between them. In this case, 
chemical action is expended in heat rather than in the production of 
electricity and the liquid becomes hot. But if carbon and zinc are 
used, a current is again produced, the zinc dissolving away as before, 
and bubbles collecting on the carbon plate. By experiment it has been 
found that many different metals may be employed in the construction 
of an electric cell; for example, current may be obtained from a cell 
made with a zinc plate and a platinum plate, or from a cell made with 
a lead plate and a copper plate. Then, too, some other chemical, such 
as bichromate of potassium, or ammonium chloride, may be used instead 
of dilute sulphuric acid. 

Almost any two different substances will, under proper conditions, 
give a current, but the strength of the current is in some cases so 
weak as to be worthless for practical use, such as telephoning, or 
ringing a door bell. What is wanted is a strong, steady current, and 
our choice of material is limited to the substances which will give 
this result. Zinc and lead can be used, but the current resulting is 
weak and feeble, and for general use zinc and carbon are the most 
satisfactory. 

283. Electrical Terms. The plates or strips used in making an 
electric cell are called electrodes; the zinc is called the negative 
electrode (-), and the carbon the positive electrode (+); the current 
is considered to flow through the wire from the + to the-electrode. As 
a rule, each electrode has attached to it a binding post to which 
wires can be quickly fastened. 

The power that causes the current is called the electromotive force, 
and the value of the electromotive force, generally written E.M.F., of 
a cell depends upon the materials used. 

When the cell consists of copper, zinc, and dilute sulphuric acid, the 
electromotive force has a definite value which is always the same no 
matter what the size or shape of the cell. But the E.M.F. has a 
decidedly different value in a cell composed of iron, copper, and 
chromic acid. Each combination of material has its own specific 
electromotive force. 

284. The Disadvantage of a Simple Cell. When the poles of a simple 
voltaic cell are connected by a wire, the current thus produced 
slowly diminishes in strength and, after a short time, becomes feeble. 
Examination of the cell shows that the copper plate is covered with 
hydrogen bubbles. If, however, these bubbles are completely brushed 
away by means of a rod or stick, the current strength increases, but 
as the bubbles again gather on the + electrode the current strength 
diminishes, and when the bubbles form a thick film on the copper 
plate, the current is too weak to be of any practical value. The film 
of bubbles weakens the current because it practically substitutes a 
hydrogen plate for a copper plate, and we saw in Section 282 that a 
change in any one of the materials of which a cell is composed changes 
the current. 

This weakening of the current can be reduced mechanically by brushing 
away the bubbles as soon as they are formed; or chemically, by 
surrounding the copper plate with a substance which will combine with 
the free hydrogen and prevent it from passing onward to the copper 
plate. 

[Illustration: FIG 198. The gravity cell.] 

In practically all cells, the chemical method is used in preference to 
the mechanical one. The numerous types of cells in daily use differ 
chiefly in the devices employed for preventing the formation of 
hydrogen bubbles, or for disposing of them when formed. One of the 
best-known cells in which weakening of the current is prevented by 
chemical means is the so-called gravity cell. 

285. The Gravity Cell. A large, irregular copper electrode is placed 
in the bottom of a jar (Fig. 198), and completely covered with a 
saturated solution of copper sulphate. Then a large, irregular zinc 
electrode is suspended from the top of the jar, and is completely 
covered with dilute sulphuric acid which does not mix with the copper 
sulphate, but floats on the top of it like oil on water. The hydrogen 
formed by the chemical action of the dilute sulphuric acid on the zinc 
moves toward the copper electrode, as in the simple voltaic cell. It 
==========
does not reach the electrode, however, because, when it comes in 
contact with the copper sulphate, it changes places with the copper 
there, setting it free, but itself entering into the solution. The 
copper freed from the copper sulphate solution travels to the copper 
electrode, and is deposited on it in a clean, bright layer. Instead of 
a deposit of hydrogen there is a deposit of copper, and falling off in 
current is prevented. 

The gravity cell is cheap, easy to construct, and of constant 
strength, and is in almost universal use in telegraphic work. 
Practically all small railroad stations and local telegraph offices 
use these cells. 

[Illustration: FIG. 199.--A dry cell.] 

286. Dry Cells. The gravity cell, while cheap and effective, is 
inconvenient for general use, owing to the fact that it cannot be 
easily transported, and the _dry cell_ has largely supplanted all 
others, because of the ease with which it can be taken from place to 
place. This cell consists of a zinc cup, within which is a carbon rod; 
the space between the cup and rod is packed with a moist paste 
containing certain chemicals. The moist paste takes the place of the 
liquids used in other cells. 

[Illustration: FIG. 200.--A battery of three cells.] 

287. A Battery of Cells. The electromotive force of one cell may not 
give a current strong enough to ring a door bell or to operate a 
telephone. But by using a number of cells, called a battery, the 
current may be increased to almost any desired strength. If three 
cells are arranged as in Figure 200, so that the copper of one cell is 
connected with the zinc of another cell, the electromotive force of 
the battery will be three times as great as the E.M.F. of a single 
cell. If four cells are arranged in the same way, the E.M.F. of the 
battery is four times as great as the E.M.F. of a single cell; when 
five cells are combined, the resulting E.M.F. is five times as great. 




CHAPTER XXXI 

==========
SOME USES OF ELECTRICITY 


288. Heat. Any one who handles electric wires knows that they are 
more or less heated by the currents which flow through them. If three 
cells are arranged as in Figure 200 and the connecting wire is coarse, 
the heating of the wire is scarcely noticeable; but if a shorter wire 
of the same kind is used, the heat produced is slightly greater; and 
if the coarse wire is replaced by a short, fine wire, the heating of 
the wire becomes very marked. We are accustomed to say that a wire 
offers resistance to the flow of a current; that is, whenever a 
current meets resistance, heat is produced in much the same way as 
when mechanical motion meets an obstacle and spends its energy in 
friction. The flow of electricity along a wire can be compared to the 
flow of water through pipes: a small pipe offers a greater resistance 
to the flow of water than a large pipe; less water can be forced 
through a small pipe than through a large pipe, but the friction of 
the water against the sides of the small pipe is much greater than in 
the large one. 

So it is with the electric current. In fine wires the resistance to 
the current is large and the energy of the battery is expended in heat 
rather than in current. If the heat thus produced is very great, 
serious consequences may arise; for example, the contact of a hot wire 
with wall paper or dry beams may cause fire. Insurance companies 
demand that the wires used in wiring a building for electric lights be 
of a size suitable to the current to be carried, otherwise they will 
not take the risk of insurance. The greater the current to be carried, 
the coarser is the wire required for safety. 

289. Electric Stoves. It is often desirable to utilize the electric 
current for the production of heat. For example, trolley cars are 
heated by coils of wire under the seats. The coils offer so much 
resistance to the passage of a strong current through them that they 
become heated and warm the cars. 

[Illustration: FIG. 201.--An electric iron on a metal stand.] 

Some modern houses are so built that electricity is received into them 
from the great plants where it is generated, and by merely turning a 
switch or inserting a plug, electricity is constantly available. In 
consequence, many practical applications of electricity are possible, 
among which are flatiron and toaster. 

[Illustration: FIG. 202.--The fine wires are strongly heated by the 
current which flows through them.] 

Within the flatiron (Fig. 201), is a mass of fine wire coiled as shown 
in Figure 202; as soon as the iron is connected with the house supply 
of electricity, current flows through the fine wire which thus becomes 
strongly heated and gives off heat to the iron. The iron, when once 
heated, retains an even temperature as long as the current flows, and 
the laundress is, in consequence, free from the disadvantages of a 
slowly cooling iron, and of frequent substitution of a warm iron for a 
cold one. Electric irons are particularly valuable in summer, because 
they eliminate the necessity for a strong fire, and spare the 
housewife intense heat. In addition, the user is not confined to the 
laundry, but is free to seek the coolest part of the house, the only 
requisite being an electrical connection. 

[Illustration: FIG. 203.--Bread can be toasted by electricity.] 

The toaster (Fig. 203) is another useful electrical device, since by 
means of it toast may be made on a dining table or at a bedside. The 
small electrical stove, shown in Figure 204, is similar in principle 
to the flatiron, but in it the heating coil is arranged as shown in 
Figure 205. To the physician electric stoves are valuable, since his 
instruments can be sterilized in water heated by the stove; and that 
without fuel or odor of gas. 

A convenient device is seen in the heating pad (Fig. 206), a 
substitute for a hot water bag. Embedded in some soft thick substance 
are the insulated wires in which heat is to be developed, and over 
this is placed a covering of felt. 

[Illustration: FIG. 204.--An electric stove.] 

290. Electric Lights. The incandescent bulbs which illuminate our 
buildings consist of a fine, hairlike thread inclosed in a glass bulb 
from which the air has been removed. When an electric current is sent 
through the delicate filament, it meets a strong resistance. The heat 
developed in overcoming the resistance is so great that it makes the 
filament a glowing mass. The absence of air prevents the filament from 
burning, and it merely glows and radiates the light. 

[Illustration: FIG. 205.--The heating element in the electric stove.] 

291. Blasting. Until recently, dynamiting was attended with serious 
danger, owing to the fact that the person who applied the torch to the 
fuse could not make a safe retreat before the explosion. Now a fine 
wire is inserted in the fuse, and when everything is in readiness, 
the ends of the wire are attached to the poles of a distant battery 
and the heat developed in the wire ignites the fuse. 

[Illustration: FIG. 206.--An electric pad serves the same purpose as a 
hot water bag.] 
==========

292. Welding of Metals. Metals are fused and welded by the use of 
the electric current. The metal pieces which are to be welded are 
pressed together and a powerful current is passed through their 
junction. So great is the heat developed that the metals melt and 
fuse, and on cooling show perfect union. 

293. Chemical Effects. _The Plating of Gold, Silver, and Other 
Metals._ If strips of lead or rods of carbon are connected to the 
terminals of an electric cell, as in Figure 208, and are then dipped 
into a solution of copper sulphate, the strip in connection with the 
negative terminal of the cell soon becomes thinly plated with a 
coating of copper. If a solution of silver nitrate is used in place of 
the copper sulphate, the coating formed will be of silver instead of 
copper. So long as the current flows and there is any metal present in 
the solution, the coating continues to form on the negative electrode, 
and becomes thicker and thicker. 

[Illustration: FIG. 207.--An incandescent electric bulb.] 

The process by which metal is taken out of solution, as silver out of 
silver nitrate and copper out of copper sulphate, and is in turn 
deposited as a coating on another substance, is called electroplating. 
An electric current can separate a liquid into some of its various 
constituents and to deposit one of the metal constituents on the 
negative electrode. 

[Illustration: FIG. 208.--Carbon rods in a solution of copper 
sulphate.] 

Since copper is constantly taken out of the solution of copper 
sulphate for deposit upon the negative electrode, the amount of copper 
remaining in the solution steadily decreases, and finally there is 
none of it left for deposit. In order to overcome this, the positive 
electrode should be made of the same metal as that which is to be 
deposited. The positive metal electrode gradually dissolves and 
replaces the metal lost from the solution by deposit and 
electroplating can continue as long as any positive electrode remains. 

[Illustration: FIG. 209.--Plating spoons by electricity.] 

Practically all silver, gold, and nickel plating is done in this way; 
machine, bicycle, and motor attachments are not solid, but are of 
cheaper material electrically plated with nickel. When spoons are to 
be plated, they are hung in a bath of silver nitrate side by side with 
a thick slab of pure silver, as in Figure 209. The spoons are 
connected with the negative terminal of the battery, while the slab of 
pure silver is connected with the positive terminal of the same 
battery. The length of time that the current flows determines the 
thickness of the plating. 

294. How Pure Metal is obtained from Ore. When ore is mined, it 
contains in addition to the desired metal many other substances. In 
order to separate out the desired metal, the ore is placed in some 
suitable acid bath, and is connected with the positive terminal of a 
battery, thus taking the place of the silver slab in the last Section. 
When current flows, any pure metal which is present is dissolved out 
of the ore and is deposited on a convenient negative electrode, while 
the impurities remain in the ore or drop as sediment to the bottom of 
the vessel. Metals separated from the ore by electricity are called 
electrolytic metals and are the purest obtainable. 

295. Printing. The ability of the electric current to decompose a 
liquid and to deposit a metal constituent has practically 
==========
revolutionized the process of printing. Formerly, type was arranged 
and retained in position until the required number of impressions had 
been made, the type meanwhile being unavailable for other uses. 
Moreover, the printing of a second edition necessitated practically as 
great labor as did the first edition, the type being necessarily set 
afresh. Now, however, the type is set up and a mold of it is taken in 
wax. This mold is coated with graphite to make it a conductor and is 
then suspended in a bath of copper sulphate, side by side with a slab 
of pure copper. Current is sent through the solution as described in 
Section 293, until a thin coating of copper has been deposited on the 
mold. The mold is then taken from the bath, and the wax is replaced by 
some metal which gives strength and support to the thin copper plate. 
From this copper plate, which is an exact reproduction of the original 
type, many thousand copies can be printed. The plate can be preserved 
and used from time to time for later editions, and the original type 
can be put back into the cases and used again. 




CHAPTER XXXII 

MODERN ELECTRICAL INVENTIONS 


==========
296. An Electric Current acts like a Magnet. In order to understand 
the action of the electric bell, we must consider a third effect which 
an electric current can cause. Connect some cells as shown in Figure 
200 and close the circuit through a stout heavy copper wire, dipping a 
portion of the wire into fine iron filings. A thick cluster of filings 
will adhere to the wire (Fig. 210), and will continue to cling to it 
so long as the current flows. If the current is broken, the filings 
fall from the wire, and only so long as the current flows through the 
wire does the wire have power to attract iron filings. An electric 
current makes a wire equivalent to a magnet, giving it the power to 
attract iron filings. 

[Illustration: FIG. 210.--A wire carrying current attracts iron 
filings.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 211.--A loosely wound coil of wire.] 

Although such a straight current bearing wire attracts iron filings, 
its power of attraction is very small; but its magnetic strength can 
be increased by coiling as in Figure 211. Such an arrangement of wire 
is known as a helix or solenoid, and is capable of lifting or pulling 
larger and more numerous filings and even good-sized pieces of iron, 
such as tacks. Filings do not adhere to the sides of the helix, but 
they cling in clusters to the ends of the coil. This shows that the 
ends of the helix have magnetic power but not the sides. 

If a soft iron nail (Fig. 212) or its equivalent is slipped within the 
coil, the lifting and attractive power of the coil is increased, and 
comparatively heavy weights can be lifted. 

[Illustration: FIG. 212.--Coil and soft iron rod.] 

A coil of wire traversed by an electric current and containing a core 
of soft iron has the power of attracting and moving heavy iron 
objects; that is, it acts like a magnet. Such an arrangement is called 
an electromagnet. As soon as the current ceases to flow, the 
electromagnet loses its magnetic power and becomes merely iron and 
wire without magnetic attraction. 

If many cells are used, the strength of the electromagnet is 
increased, and if the coil is wound closely, as in Figure 213, instead 
of loosely, as in Figure 211, the magnetic strength is still further 
increased. The strength of any electromagnet depends upon the number 
of coils wound on the iron core and upon the strength of the current 
which is sent through the coils. 

[Illustration: FIG. 213.--An electromagnet.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 214.--A horseshoe electromagnet is powerful enough 
to support heavy weights.] 

To increase the strength of the electromagnet still further, the 
so-called horseshoe shape is used (Fig. 214). In such an arrangement 
there is practically the strength of two separate electromagnets. 

297. The Electric Bell. The ringing of the electric bell is due to 
the attractive power of an electromagnet. By the pushing of a button 
(Fig. 215) connection is made with a battery, and current flows 
through the wire wound on the iron spools, and further to the screw 
_P_ which presses against the soft iron strip or armature _S_; and 
from _S_ the current flows back to the battery. As soon as the 
current flows, the coils become magnetic and attract the soft iron 
armature, drawing it forward and causing the clapper to strike the 
bell. In this position, _S_ no longer touches the screw _P_, and hence 
there is no complete path for the electricity, and the current ceases. 
But the attractive, magnetic power of the coils stops as soon as the 
current ceases; hence there is nothing to hold the armature down, and 
it flies back to its former position. In doing this, however, the 
armature makes contact at _P_ through the spring, and the current 
flows once more; as a result the coils again become magnets, the 
armature is again drawn forward, and the clapper again strikes the 
bell. But immediately afterwards the armature springs backward and 
makes contact at _P_ and the entire operation is repeated. So long as 
==========
we press the button this process continues producing what sounds like 
a continuous jingle; in reality the clapper strikes the bell every 
time a current passes through the electromagnet. 

[Illustration: FIG. 215.--The electric bell.] 

298. The Push Button. The push button is an essential part of every 
electric bell, because without it the bell either would not ring at 
all, or would ring incessantly until the cell was exhausted. When the 
push button is free, as in Figure 216, the cell terminals are not 
connected in an unbroken path, and hence the current does not flow. 
When, however, the button is pressed, the current has a complete path, 
provided there is the proper connection at _S_. That is, the pressure 
on the push button permits current to flow to the bell. The flow of 
this current then depends solely upon the connection at _S_, which is 
alternately made and broken, and in this way produces sound. 

[Illustration: FIG. 216.--Push button.] 

The sign "Bell out of order" is usually due to the fact that the 
battery is either temporarily or permanently exhausted. In warm 
weather the liquid in the cell may dry up and cause stoppage of the 
current. If fresh liquid is poured into the vessel so that the 
chemical action of the acid on the zinc is renewed, the current again 
flows. Another explanation of an out-of-order bell is that the liquid 
may have eaten up all the zinc; if this is the case, the insertion of 
a fresh strip of zinc will remove the difficulty and the current will 
flow. If dry cells are used, there is no remedy except in the purchase 
of new cells. 

==========
299. How Electricity may be lost to Use. In the electric bell, we 
saw that an air gap at the push button stopped the flow of 
electricity. If we cut the wire connecting the poles of a battery, the 
current ceases because an air gap intervenes and electricity does not 
readily pass through air. Many substances besides air stop the flow of 
electricity. If a strip of glass, rubber, mica, or paraffin is 
introduced anywhere in a circuit, the current ceases. If a metal is 
inserted in the gap, the current again flows. Substances which, like 
an air gap, interfere with the flow of electricity are called 
non-conductors, or, more commonly, insulators. Substances which, like 
the earth, the human body, and all other moist objects, conduct 
electricity are conductors. If the telephone and electric light wires 
in our houses were not insulated by a covering of thread, or cloth, or 
other non conducting material, the electricity would escape into 
surrounding objects instead of flowing through the wire and producing 
sound and light. 

In our city streets, the overhead wires are supported on glass knobs 
or are closely wrapped, in order to prevent the escape of electricity 
through the poles to the ground. In order to have a steady, dependable 
current, the wire carrying the current must be insulated. 

Lack of insulation means not only the loss of current for practical 
uses, but also serious consequences in the event of the crossing of 
current-bearing wires. If two wires properly insulated touch each 
other, the currents flow along their respective wires unaltered; if, 
however, two uninsulated wires touch, some of the electricity flows 
from one to the other. Heat is developed as a result of this 
transference, and the heat thus developed is sometimes so great that 
fire occurs. For this reason, wires are heavily insulated and extra 
protection is provided at points where numerous wires touch or cross. 

Conductors and insulators are necessary to the efficient and economic 
flow of a current, the insulator preventing the escape of electricity 
and lessening the danger of fire, and the conductor carrying the 
current. 

300. The Telegraph. Telegraphy is the process of transmitting 
messages from place to place by means of an electric current. The 
principle underlying the action of the telegraph is the principle upon 
which the electric bell operates; namely, that a piece of soft iron 
becomes a magnet while a current flows around it, but loses its 
magnetism as soon as the current ceases. 

In the electric bell, the electromagnet, clapper, push button, and 
battery are relatively near,--usually all are located in the same 
building; while in the telegraph the current may travel miles before 
it reaches the electromagnet and produces motion of the armature. 

[Illustration: FIG. 217.--Diagram of the electric telegraph.] 

The fundamental connections of the telegraph are shown in Figure 217. 
If the key _K_ is pressed down by an operator in Philadelphia, the 
current from the battery (only one cell is shown for simplicity) flows 
through the line to New York, passes through the electromagnet _M_, 
and thence back to Philadelphia. As long as the key _K_ is pressed 
down, the coil _M_ acts as a magnet and attracts and holds fast the 
armature _A_; but as soon as _K_ is released, the current is broken, 
==========
_M_ loses its magnetism, and the armature is pulled back by the spring 
_D_. By a mechanical device, tape is drawn uniformly under the light 
marker _P_ attached to the armature. If _K_ is closed for but a short 
time, the armature is drawn down for but a short interval, and the 
marker registers a dot on the tape. If _K_ is closed for a longer 
time, a short dash is made by the marker, and, in general, the length 
of time that _K_ is closed determines the length of the marks recorded 
on the tape. The telegraphic alphabet consists of dots and dashes and 
their various combinations, and hence an interpretation of the dot and 
dash symbols recorded on the tape is all that is necessary for the 
receiving of a telegraphic message. 

The Morse telegraphic code, consisting of dots, dashes, and spaces, is 
given in Figure 218. 

[Illustration: 

|A .- |H .... |O . . |U ..- | 
|B -... |I .. |P ..... |V ...- | 
|C .. . |J -.-. |Q ..-. |W .-- | 
|D -.. |K -.- |R . .. |X .-.. | 
|E . |L --- |S ... |Y .. .. | 
|F .-. |M - - |T - |Z ... . | 
|G --. |N -. | | | 

FIG. 218.--The Morse telegraphic code.] 

The telegraph is now such a universal means of communication between 
distant points that one wonders how business was conducted before its 
invention in 1832 by S.F.B. Morse. 

[Illustration: FIG. 219.--The sounder.] 

301. Improvements. _The Sounder._ Shortly after the invention of 
==========
telegraphy, operators learned that they could read the message by the 
click of the marker against a metal rod which took the place of the 
tape. In practically all telegraph offices of the present day the 
old-fashioned tape is replaced by the sounder, shown in Figure 219. 
When current flows, a lever, _L_, is drawn down by the electromagnet 
and strikes against a solid metal piece with a click; when the current 
is broken, the lever springs upward, strikes another metal piece and 
makes a different click. It is clear that the working of the key which 
starts and stops the current in this line will be imitated by the 
motion and the resulting clicks of the sounder. By means of these 
varying clicks of the sounder, the operator interprets the message. 

[Illustration: FIG. 220.--Diagram of a modern telegraph system.] 

_The Relay._ When a telegraph line is very long, the resistance of the 
wire is great, and the current which passes through the electromagnet 
is correspondingly weak, so feeble indeed that the armature must be 
made very thin and light in order to be affected by the makes and 
breaks in the current. The clicks of an armature light enough to 
respond to the weak current of a long wire are too faint to be 
recognized by the ear, and hence in such long circuits some device 
must be introduced whereby the effect is increased. This is usually 
done by installing at each station a local battery and a very delicate 
and sensitive electromagnet called the _relay_. Under these conditions 
the current of the main line is not sent through the sounder, but 
through the relay which opens and closes a local battery in connection 
with the strong sounder. For example, the relay is so arranged that 
current from the main line runs through it exactly as it runs through 
_M_ in Figure 217. When current is made, the relay attracts an 
armature, which thereby closes a circuit in a local battery and thus 
causes a click of the sounder. When the current in the main line is 
broken, the relay loses its magnetic attraction, its armature springs 
back, connection is broken in the local circuit, and the sounder 
responds by allowing its armature to spring back with a sharp sound. 

302. The Earth an Important Part of a Telegraphic System. We learned 
in Section 299 that electricity could flow through many different 
substances, one of which was the earth. In all ordinary telegraph 
lines, advantage is taken of this fact to utilize the earth as a 
conductor and to dispense with one wire. Originally two wires were 
used, as in Figure 217; then it was found that a railroad track could 
be substituted for one wire, and later that the earth itself served 
equally well for a return wire. The present arrangement is shown in 
Figure 220, where there is but one wire, the circuit being completed 
by the earth. No fact in electricity seems more marvelous than that 
the thousands of messages flashing along the wires overhead are 
==========
likewise traveling through the ground beneath. If it were not for this 
use of the earth as an unfailing conductor, the network of overhead 
wires in our city streets would be even more complex than it now is. 

303. Advances in Telegraphy. The mechanical improvements in 
telegraphy have been so rapid that at present a single operator can 
easily send or receive forty words a minute. He can telegraph more 
quickly than the average person can write; and with a combination of 
the latest improvements the speed can be enormously increased. 
Recently, 1500 words were flashed from New York to Boston over a 
single wire in one second. 

In actual practice messages are not ordinarily sent long distances 
over a direct line, but are automatically transferred to new lines at 
definite points. For example, a message from New York to Chicago does 
not travel along an uninterrupted path, but is automatically 
transferred at some point, such as Lancaster, to a second line which 
carries it on to Pittsburgh, where it is again transferred to a third 
line which takes it farther on to its destination. 




CHAPTER XXXIII 

MAGNETS AND CURRENTS 


304. In the twelfth century, there was introduced into Europe from 
China a simple instrument which changed journeying on the sea from 
uncertain wandering to a definite, safe voyage. This instrument was 
the compass (Fig. 221), and because of the property of the compass 
needle (a magnet) to point unerringly north and south, sailors were 
able to determine directions on the sea and to steer for the desired 
point. 

[Illustration: FIG. 221.--The compass.] 

==========
Since an electric current is practically equivalent to a magnet 
(Section 296), it becomes necessary to know the most important facts 
relative to magnets, facts simple in themselves but of far-reaching 
value and consequences in electricity. Without a knowledge of the 
magnetic characteristics of currents, the construction of the motor 
would have been impossible, and trolley cars, electric fans, motor 
boats, and other equally well-known electrical contrivances would be 
unknown. 

305. The Attractive Power of a Magnet. The magnet best known to us 
all is the compass needle, but for convenience we will use a magnetic 
needle in the shape of a bar larger and stronger than that employed in 
the compass. If we lay such a magnet on a pile of iron filings, it 
will be found on lifting the magnet that the filings cling to the ends 
in tufts, but leave it almost bare in the center (Fig. 222). The 
points of attraction at the two ends are called the poles of the 
magnet. 

[Illustration: FIG. 222.--A magnet.] 

If a delicately made magnet is suspended as in Figure 223, and is 
allowed to swing freely, it will always assume a definite north and 
south position. The pole which points north when the needle is 
suspended is called the north pole and is marked _N_, while the pole 
which points south when the needle is suspended is called the south 
pole and is marked _S_. 

A freely suspended magnet points nearly north and south. 

A magnet has two main points of attraction called respectively the 
north and south poles. 

[Illustration: FIG. 223.--The magnetic needle.] 

306. The Extent of Magnetic Attraction. If a thin sheet of paper or 
cardboard is laid over a strong, bar-shaped magnet and iron filings 
are then gently strewn on the paper, the filings clearly indicate the 
position of the magnet beneath, and if the cardboard is gently tapped, 
the filings arrange themselves as shown in Figure 224. If the paper is 
held some distance above the magnet, the influence on the filings is 
less definite, and finally, if the paper is held very far away, the 
filings do not respond at all, but lie on the cardboard as dropped. 

The magnetic power of a magnet, while not confined to the magnet 
itself, does not extend indefinitely into the surrounding region; the 
influence is strong near the magnet, but at a distance becomes so weak 
as to be inappreciable. The region around a magnet through which its 
magnetic force is felt is called the field of force, or simply the 
magnetic field, and the definite lines in which the filings arrange 
themselves are called lines of force. 

[Illustration: FIG. 224.--Iron filings scattered over a magnet arrange 
themselves in definite lines.] 

The magnetic power of a magnet is not limited to the magnet, but 
extends to a considerable distance in all directions. 

307. The Influence of Magnets upon Each Other. If while our 
suspended magnetic needle is at rest in its characteristic 
north-and-south direction another magnet is brought near, the 
suspended magnet is turned; that is, motion is produced (Fig. 225). If 
the north pole of the free magnet is brought toward the south pole of 
the suspended magnet, the latter moves in such a way that the two 
poles _N_ and _S_ are as close together as possible. If the north pole 
of the free magnet is brought toward the north pole of the suspended 
magnet, the latter moves in such a way that the two poles _N_ and _N_ 
are as far apart as possible. In every case that can be tested, it is 
found that a north pole repels a north pole, and a south pole repels a 
south pole; but that a north and a south pole always attract each 
other. 

[Illustration: FIG. 225.--A south pole attracts a north pole.] 

The main facts relative to magnets may be summed up as follows:-- 

_a_. A magnet points nearly north and south if it is allowed to swing 
freely. 

_b_. A magnet contains two unlike poles, one of which persistently 
points north, and the other of which as persistently points south, if 
allowed to swing freely. 

_c_. Poles of the same name repel each other; poles of unlike name 
attract each other. 

_d_. A magnet possesses the power of attracting certain substances, 
like iron, and this power of attraction is not limited to the magnet 
itself but extends into the region around the magnet. 

308. Magnetic Properties of an Electric Current. If a 
current-bearing wire is really equivalent in its magnetic powers to a 
magnet, it must possess all of the characteristics mentioned in the 
==========
preceding Section. We saw in Section 296 that a coiled wire through 
which current was flowing would attract iron filings at the two ends 
of the helix. That a coil through which current flows possesses the 
characteristics _a_, _b_, _c_, and _d_ of a magnet is shown as follows:-- 

_a_, _b_. If a helix marked at one end with a red string is arranged so 
that it is free to rotate and a strong current is sent through it, 
the helix will immediately turn and face about until it points north 
and south. If it is disturbed from this position, it will slowly swing 
back until it occupies its characteristic north and south position. 
The end to which the string is attached will persistently point either 
north or south. If the current is sent through the coil in the 
opposite direction, the two poles exchange positions and the helix 
turns until the new north pole points north. 

[Illustration: FIG. 226.--A helix through which current flows always 
points north and south, if it is free to rotate.] 

_c_. If a coil conducting a current is held near a suspended magnet, 
one end of the helix will be found to attract the north pole of the 
magnet, while the opposite end will be found to repel the north pole 
of the magnet. In fact, the helix will be found to behave in every 
way as a magnet, with a north pole at one end and a south pole at the 
other. If the current is sent through the helix in the opposite 
direction, the north and south poles exchange places. 

[Illustration: FIG. 227.--A wire through which current flows is 
surrounded by a field of magnetic force.] 

If the number of turns in the helix is reduced until but a single loop 
remains, the result is the same; the single loop acts like a flat 
magnet, one side of the loop always facing northward and one 
southward, and one face attracting the north pole of the suspended 
magnet and one repelling it. 

_d_. If a wire is passed through a card and a strong current is sent 
through the wire, iron filings will, when sprinkled upon the card, 
arrange themselves in definite directions (Fig. 227). A wire carrying 
a current is surrounded by a magnetic field of force. 

A magnetic needle held under a current-bearing wire turns on its pivot 
and finally comes to rest at an angle with the current. The fact that 
the needle is deflected by the wire shows that the magnetic power of 
the wire extends into the surrounding medium. 

The magnetic properties of current electricity were discovered by 
Oersted of Denmark less than a hundred years ago; but since that time 
practically all important electrical machinery has been based upon one 
or more of the magnetic properties of electricity. The motors which 
drive our electric fans, our mills, and our trolley cars owe their 
existence entirely to the magnetic action of current electricity. 

[Illustration: FIG. 228.--The coil turns in such a way that its north 
pole is opposite the south pole of the magnet.] 

309. The Principle of the Motor. If a close coil of wire is 
suspended between the poles of a strong horseshoe magnet, it will not 
assume any characteristic position but will remain wherever placed. 
If, however, a current is sent through the wire, the coil faces about 
and assumes a definite position. This is because a coil, carrying a 
current, is equivalent to a magnet with a north and south face; and, 
in accordance with the magnetic laws, tends to move until its north 
face is opposite the south pole of the horseshoe magnet, and its south 
face opposite the north pole of the magnet. If, when the coil is at 
rest in this position, the current is reversed, so that the north pole 
of the coil becomes a south pole and the former south pole becomes a 
north pole, the result is that like poles of coil and magnet face each 
other. But since like poles repel each other, the coil will move, and 
will rotate until its new north pole is opposite to the south pole of 
the magnet and its new south pole is opposite the north pole. By 
sending a strong current through the coil, the helix is made to rotate 
through a half turn; by reversing the current when the coil is at the 
half turn, the helix is made to continue its rotation and to swing 
through a whole turn. If the current could be repeatedly reversed just 
as the helix completed its half turn, the motion could be prolonged; 
periodic current reversal would produce continuous rotation. This is 
the principle of the motor. 

[Illustration: FIG. 229.--Principle of the motor.] 

It is easy to see that long-continued rotation would be impossible in 
the arrangement of Figure 228, since the twisting of the suspending 
wire would interfere with free motion. If the motor is to be used for 
continuous motion, some device must be employed by means of which the 
helix is capable of continued rotation around its support. 

In practice, the rotating coil of a motor is arranged as shown in 
Figure 229. Wires from the coil terminate on metal disks and are 
securely soldered there. The coil and disks are supported by the 
strong and well-insulated rod _R_, which rests upon braces, but which 
nevertheless rotates freely with disks and coil. The current flows to 
the coil through the thin metal strips called brushes, which rest 
lightly upon the disks. 

When the current which enters at _B_ flows through the wire, the coil 
rotates, tending to set itself so that its north face is opposite the 
south face of the magnet. If, when the helix has just reached this 
position, the current is reversed--entering at _B'_ instead of 
_B_--the poles of the coil are exchanged; the rotation, therefore, 
==========
does not cease, but continues for another half turn. Proper reversals 
of the current are accompanied by continuous motion, and since the 
disk and shaft rotate with the coil, there is continuous rotation. 

If a wheel is attached to the rotating shaft, weights can be lifted, 
and if a belt is attached to the wheel, the motion of the rotating 
helix can be transferred to machinery for practical use. 

The rotating coil is usually spoken of as the armature, and the large 
magnet as the field magnet. 

310. Mechanical Reversal of the Current. _The Commutator_. It is not 
possible by hand to reverse the current with sufficient rapidity and 
precision to insure uninterrupted rotation; moreover, the physical 
exertion of such frequent reversals is considerable. Hence, some 
mechanical device for periodically reversing the current is necessary, 
if the motor is to be of commercial value. 

[Illustration: FIG. 230.--The commutator.] 

The mechanical reversal of the current is accomplished by the use of 
the commutator, which is a metal ring split into halves, well 
insulated from each other and from the shaft. To each half of this 
ring is attached one of the ends of the armature wire. The brushes 
which carry the current are set on opposite sides of the ring and do 
not rotate. As armature, commutator, and shaft rotate, the brushes 
connect first with one segment of the commutator and then with the 
other. Since the circuit is arranged so that the current always enters 
the commutator through the brush _B_, the flow of the current into the 
coil is always through the segment in contact with _B_; but the 
segment in contact with _B_ changes at every half turn of the coil, 
and hence the direction of the current through the coil changes 
periodically. As a result the coil rotates continuously, and produces 
motion so long as current is supplied from without. 

311. The Practical Motor. A motor constructed in accordance with 
Section 309 would be of little value in practical everyday affairs; 
its armature rotates too slowly and with too little force. If a motor 
is to be of real service, its armature must rotate with sufficient 
strength to impart motion to the wheels of trolley cars and mills, to 
drive electric fans, and to set into activity many other forms of 
machinery. 

The strength of a motor may be increased by replacing the singly 
coiled armature by one closely wound on an iron core; in some 
armatures there are thousands of turns of wire. The presence of soft 
iron within the armature (Section 296) causes greater attraction 
between the armature and the outside magnet, and hence greater force 
of motion. The magnetic strength of the field magnet influences 
greatly the speed of the armature; the stronger the field magnet the 
greater the motion, so electricians make every effort to strengthen 
their field magnets. The strongest known magnets are electromagnets, 
which, as we have seen, are merely coils of wire wound on an iron 
core. For this reason, the field magnet is usually an electromagnet. 

When very powerful motors are necessary, the field magnet is so 
arranged that it has four or more poles instead of two; the armature 
likewise consists of several portions, and even the commutator may be 
==========
very complex. But no matter how complex these various parts may seem 
to be, the principle is always that stated in Section 309, and the 
parts are limited to field magnet, commutator, and armature. 

[Illustration: FIG. 231.--A modern power plant.] 

[Illustration: FIG. 232.--The electric street car.] 

The motor is of value because by means of it motion, or mechanical 
energy, is obtained from an electric current. Nearly all electric 
street cars (Fig. 232), are set in motion by powerful motors placed 
under the cars. As the armature rotates, its motion is communicated by 
gears to the wheels, the necessary current reaching the motor through 
the overhead wires. Small motors may be used to great advantage in the 
home, where they serve to turn the wheels of sewing machines, and to 
operate washing machines. Vacuum cleaners are frequently run by 
motors. 




CHAPTER XXXIV 

HOW ELECTRICITY MAY BE MEASURED 


312. Danger of an Oversupply of Current. If a small toy motor is 
connected with one cell, it rotates slowly; if connected with two 
cells, it rotates more rapidly, and in general, the greater the number 
of cells used, the stronger will be the action of the motor. But it is 
==========
possible to send too strong a current through our wire, thereby 
interfering with all motion and destroying the motor. We have seen in 
Section 288 that the amount of current which can safely flow through a 
wire depends upon the thickness of the wire. A strong current sent 
through a fine wire has its electrical energy transformed largely into 
heat; and if the current is very strong, the heat developed may be 
sufficient to burn off the insulation and melt the wire itself. This 
is true not only of motors, but of all electric machinery in which 
there are current-bearing wires. The current should not be greater 
than the wires can carry, otherwise too much heat will be developed 
and damage will be done to instruments and surroundings. 

The current sent through our electric stoves and irons should be 
strong enough to heat the coils, but not strong enough to melt them. 
If the current sent through our electric light wires is too great for 
the capacity of the wires, the heat developed will injure the wires 
and may cause disastrous results. The overloading of wires is 
responsible for many disastrous fires. 

The danger of overloading may be eliminated by inserting in the 
circuit a fuse or other safety device. A fuse is made by combining a 
number of metals in such a way that the resulting substance has a low 
melting point and a high electrical resistance. A fuse is inserted in 
the circuit, and the instant the current increases beyond its normal 
amount the fuse melts, breaks the circuit, and thus protects the 
remaining part of the circuit from the danger of an overload. In this 
way, a circuit designed to carry a certain current is protected from 
the danger of an accidental overload. The noise made by the burning 
out of a fuse in a trolley car frequently alarms passengers, but it is 
really a sign that the system is in good working order and that there 
is no danger of accident from too strong a current. 

313. How Current is Measured. The preceding Section has shown 
clearly the danger of too strong a current, and the necessity for 
limiting the current to that which the wire can safely carry. There 
are times when it is desirable to know accurately the strength of a 
current, not only in order to guard against an overload, but also in 
order to determine in advance the mechanical and chemical effects 
which will be produced by the current. For example, the strength of 
the current determines the thickness of the coating of silver which 
forms in a given time on a spoon placed in an electrolytic bath; if 
the current is weak, a thin plating is made on the spoon; if the 
current is strong, a thick plating is made. If, therefore, the exact 
value of the current is known, the exact amount of silver which will 
be deposited on the spoon in a given time can be definitely 
calculated. 

[Illustration: FIG. 233.--The principle of the galvanometer.] 

Current-measuring instruments, or galvanometers, depend for their 
action on the magnetic properties of current electricity. The 
principle of practically all galvanometers is as follows:-- 

A closely wound coil of fine wire free to rotate is suspended as in 
Figure 233 between the poles of a strong magnet. When a current is 
sent through the coil, the coil becomes a magnet and turns so that its 
faces will be towards the poles of the permanent magnet. But as the 
coil turns, the suspending wire becomes twisted and hinders the 
turning. For this reason, the coil can turn only until the motion 
caused by the current is balanced by the twist of the suspending wire. 
But the stronger the current through the coil, the stronger will be 
the force tending to rotate the coil, and hence the less effective 
will be the hindrance of the twisting string. As a consequence, the 
coil swings farther than before; that is, the greater the current, the 
farther the swing. Usually a delicate pointer is attached to the 
movable coil and rotates freely with it, so that the swing of the 
pointer indicates the relative values of the current. If the source of 
the current is a gravity cell, the swing is only two thirds as great 
as when a dry cell is used, indicating that the dry cell furnishes 
about 1-1/2 times as much current as a gravity cell. 

314. Ammeters. A galvanometer does not measure the current, but 
merely indicates the relative strength of different currents. But it 
is desirable at times to measure a current in units. Instruments for 
measuring the strength of currents in units are called ammeters, and 
the common form makes use of a galvanometer. 

A current is sent through a movable coil (the field magnet and coil 
are inclosed in the case) (Fig. 234), and the magnetic field thus 
developed causes the coil to turn, and the pointer attached to it to 
move over a scale graduated so that it reads current strengths. This 
scale is carefully graduated by the following method. 

If two silver rods (Fig. 208) are weighed and placed in a solution of 
silver nitrate, and current from a single cell is passed through the 
liquid for a definite time, we find, on weighing the two rods, that 
one has gained in weight and the other has lost. If the current is 
allowed to flow twice as long, the amount of silver lost and gained by 
the electrodes is doubled; and if twice the current is used, the 
result is again doubled. 

As a result of numerous experiments, it was found that a definite 
current of electricity will deposit a definite amount of silver in a 
definite time, and that the amount of silver deposited on an electrode 
in one second might be used to measure the current of electricity 
which has flowed through the circuit in one second. 

A current is said to be one ampere strong if it will deposit silver on 
an electrode at the rate of 0.001118 gram per second. 

[Illustration: FIG. 234.--An ammeter.] 

In marking the scale, an ammeter is placed in the circuit of an 
electrolytic cell and the position of the pointer is marked on the 
blank card which lies beneath and which is to serve as a scale (Fig. 
235). After the current has flowed for about an hour, the amount of 
silver which has been deposited is measured. Knowing the time during 
which the current has run, and the amount of deposit, the strength of 
the current in amperes can be calculated. This number is written 
opposite the place at which the pointer stood during the experiment. 

The scale may be completed by marking the positions of the pointer 
when other currents of known strength flow through the ammeter. 
==========

[Illustration: FIG. 235.--Marking the scale of an ammeter.] 

All electric plants, whether for heating, lighting, or for machinery, 
are provided with ammeters, such instruments being as important to an 
electric plant as the steam gauge is to the boiler. 

315. Voltage and Voltmeters. Since electromotive force, or voltage, 
is the cause of current, it should be possible to compare different 
electromotive forces by comparing the currents which they produce in a 
given circuit. But two voltages of equal value do not give equal 
currents unless the resistances met by the currents are equal. For 
example, the simple voltaic cell and the gravity cell have 
approximately equal voltages, but the current produced by the voltaic 
cell is stronger than that produced by the gravity cell. This is 
because the current meets more resistance within the gravity cell 
than within the voltaic cell. Every cell, no matter what its nature, 
offers resistance to the flow of electricity through it and is said to 
have internal resistance. If we are determining the voltages of 
various cells by a comparison of the respective currents produced, the 
result will be true only on condition that the resistances in the 
various circuits are equal. If a very large external resistance of 
fine wire is placed in circuit with a gravity cell, the _total_ 
resistance of the circuit (made up of the relatively small resistance 
in the cell and the larger resistance in the rest of the circuit) will 
differ but little from that of another circuit in which the gravity 
cell is replaced by a voltaic cell, or any other type of cell. 

With a high resistance in the outside circuit, the deflections of the 
ammeter will be small, but such as they are, they will fairly 
accurately represent the electromotive forces which produce them. 

Voltmeters (Fig. 236), or instruments for measuring voltage, are like 
ammeters except that a wire of very high resistance is in circuit with 
the movable coil. In external appearance they are not distinguishable 
from ammeters. 

[Illustration: FIG. 236.--A voltmeter.] 

The unit of electromotive force is called the _volt_. The voltage of a 
dry cell is approximately 1.5 volts, and the voltage of a voltaic cell 
and of a gravity cell is approximately 1 volt. 

316. Current, Voltage, Resistance. We learned in Section 287 that 
the strength of a current increases when the electromotive force 
increases, and diminishes when the electromotive force diminishes. 
Later, in Section 288, we learned that the strength of the current 
decreases as the resistance in circuit increases. 

The strength of a steady current depends upon these two factors only, 
the electromotive force which causes it and the resistance which it 
has to overcome. 

317. Resistance. Since resistance plays so important a r??le in 
electricity, it becomes necessary to have a unit of resistance. The 
practical unit of resistance is called an ohm, and some idea of the 
==========
value of an ohm can be obtained if we remember that a 300-foot length 
of common iron telegraph wire has a resistance of 1 ohm. An 
approximate ohm for rough work in the laboratory may be made by 
winding 9 feet 5 inches of number 30 copper wire on a spool or 
arranging it in any other convenient form. 

In Section 299 we learned that substances differ very greatly in the 
resistance which they offer to electricity, and so it will not 
surprise us to learn that while it takes 300 feet of iron telegraph 
wire to give 1 ohm of resistance, it takes but 39 feet of number 24 
copper wire, and but 2.2 feet of number 24 German silver wire, to give 
the same resistance. 

NOTE. The number of a wire indicates its diameter; number 
30, for example, being always of a definite fixed diameter, 
no matter what the material of the wire. 

If we wish to avoid loss of current by heating, we use a wire of low 
resistance; while if we wish to transform electricity into heat, as in 
the electric stove, we choose wire of high resistance, as German 
silver wire. 




CHAPTER XXXV 

HOW ELECTRICITY IS OBTAINED ON A LARGE SCALE 


318. The Dynamo. We have learned that cells furnish current as a 
result of chemical action, and that the substance usually consumed 
within the cell is zinc. Just as coal within the furnace furnishes 
heat, so zinc within the cell furnishes electricity. But zinc is a 
much more expensive fuel than coal or oil or gas, and to run a large 
==========
motor by electricity produced in this way would be very much more 
expensive than to run the motor by water or steam. For weak and 
infrequent currents such as are used in the electric bell, only small 
quantities of zinc are needed, and the expense is small. But for the 
production of such powerful currents as are needed to drive trolley 
cars, elevators, and huge machinery, enormous quantities of zinc would 
be necessary and the cost would be prohibitive. It is safe to say that 
electricity would never have been used on a large scale if some less 
expensive and more convenient source than zinc had not been found. 

319. A New Source of Electricity. It came to most of us as a 
surprise that an electric current has magnetic properties and 
transforms a coil into a veritable magnet. Perhaps it will not 
surprise us now to learn that a magnet in motion has electric 
properties and is, in fact, able to produce a current within a wire. 
This can be proved as follows:-- 

[Illustration: FIG. 237.--The motion of a magnet within a coil of wire 
produces a current of electricity.] 

Attach a closely wound coil to a sensitive galvanometer (Fig. 237); 
naturally there is no deflection of the galvanometer needle, because 
there is no current in the wire. Now thrust a magnet into the coil. 
Immediately there is a deflection of the needle, which indicates that 
a current is flowing through the circuit. If the magnet is allowed to 
remain at rest within the coil, the needle returns to its zero 
position, showing that the current has ceased. Now let the magnet be 
withdrawn from the coil; the needle is deflected as before, but the 
deflection is in the opposite direction, showing that a current 
exists, but that it flows in the opposite direction. We learn, 
therefore, that a current may be induced in a coil by moving a magnet 
back and forth within the coil, but that a magnet at rest within the 
coil has no such influence. 

An electric current transforms a coil into a magnet. A magnet in 
motion induces electricity within a coil; that is, causes a current to 
flow through the coil. 

A magnet possesses lines of force, and as the magnet moves toward the 
coil it carries lines of force with it, and the coil is cut, so to 
speak, by these lines of force. As the magnet recedes from the coil, 
it carries lines of force away with it, this time reducing the number 
of the lines which cut the coil. 

[Illustration: FIG. 238.--As long as the coil rotates between the 
poles of the magnet, current flows.] 

320. A Test of the Preceding Statement. We will test the statement 
that a magnet has electric properties by another experiment. Between 
the poles of a strong magnet suspend a movable coil which is connected 
with a sensitive galvanometer (Fig. 237). Starting with the coil in 
the position of Figure 228, when many lines of force pass through it, 
let the coil be rotated quickly until it reaches the position 
indicated in Figure 238, when no lines of force pass through it. 
During the motion of the coil, a strong deflection of the galvanometer 
is observed; but the deflection ceases as soon as the coil ceases to 
rotate. If, now, starting with the position of Figure 238, the coil is 
rotated forward to its starting point, a deflection occurs in the 
opposite direction, showing that a current is present, but that it 
flows in the opposite direction. So long as the coil is in motion, it 
is cut by a varying number of lines of force, and current is induced 
in the coil. 

_The above arrangement is a dynamo in miniature_. By rotation of a 
coil (armature) within a magnetic field, that is, between the poles of 
a magnet, current is obtained. 

In the _motor_, current produces motion. In the _dynamo_, motion 
produces current. 

321. The Dynamo. As has been said, the arrangement of the preceding 
Section is a dynamo in miniature. Every dynamo, no matter how complex 
its structure and appearance, consists of a coil of wire which can 
rotate continuously between the poles of a strong magnet. The 
==========
mechanical devices to insure easy rotation are similar in all respects 
to those previously described for the motor. 

[Illustration: FIG. 239.--A modern electrical machine.] 

The current obtained from such a dynamo alternates in direction, 
flowing first in one direction and then in the opposite direction. 
Such alternating currents are unsatisfactory for many purposes, and to 
be of service are in many cases transformed into direct currents; that 
is, current which flows steadily in one direction. This is 
accomplished by the use of a commutator. In the construction of the 
motor, continuous _motion_ in one direction is obtained by the use of 
a commutator (Section 310); in the construction of a dynamo, 
continuous _current_ in one direction is obtained by the use of a 
similar device. 

322. Powerful Dynamos. The power and efficiency of a dynamo are 
increased by employing the devices previously mentioned in connection 
with the motor. Electromagnets are used in place of simple magnets, 
and the armature, instead of being a simple coil, may be made up of 
many coils wound on soft iron. The speed with which the armature is 
rotated influences the strength of the induced current, and hence the 
armature is run at high speed. 

[Illustration: FIG. 240.--Thomas Edison, one of the foremost 
electrical inventors of the present day.] 

A small dynamo, such as is used for lighting fifty incandescent lamps, 
has a horse power of about 33.5, and large dynamos are frequently as 
powerful as 7500 horse power. 

323. The Telephone. When a magnet is at rest within a closed coil of 
wire, as in Section 319, current does not flow through the wire. But 
if a piece of iron is brought near the magnet, current is induced and 
flows through the wire; if the iron is withdrawn, current is again 
induced in the wire but flows in the opposite direction. As iron 
approaches and recedes from the magnet, current is induced in the wire 
surrounding the magnet. This is in brief the principle of the 
telephone. When one talks into a receiver, _L_, the voice throws into 
vibration a sensitive iron plate standing before an electromagnet. The 
back and forth motion of the iron plate induces current in the 
electromagnet _c_. The current thus induced makes itself evident at 
the opposite end of the line _M_, where by its magnetic attraction, it 
throws a second iron plate into vibrations. The vibrations of the 
second plate are similar to those produced in the first plate by the 
voice. The vibrations of the far plate thus reproduce the sounds 
uttered at the opposite end. 

[Illustration: FIG. 241.--Diagram of a simple telephone circuit.] 

324. Cost of Electric Power. The water power of a stream depends 
upon the quantity of water and the force with which it flows. The 
electric power of a current depends upon the quantity of electricity 
and the force under which it flows. The unit of electric power is 
called the watt; it is the power furnished by a current of one ampere 
with a voltage of one volt. 

One watt represents a very small amount of electric power, and for 
practical purposes a unit 1000 times as large is used, namely, the 
kilowatt. By experiment it has been found that one kilowatt is 
equivalent to about 1-1/3 horse power. Electric current is charged for 
by the watt hour. A current of one ampere, having a voltage of one 
volt, will furnish in the course of one hour one watt hour of energy. 
Energy for electric lighting is sold at the rate of about ten cents 
per kilowatt hour. For other purposes it is less expensive. The meters 
commonly used measure the amperes, volts, and time automatically, and 
register the electric power supplied in watt hours. 
==========
